A Pan for All Seasonings
   pmq.com/a-pan-for-all-seasonings

Blake Harris                                                               January 3, 2013


Question:
What are the keys to taking care of seasoned pans?

Answer:
Pans come in two basic colors—bright finish and dark (green, gray or black)—and in
two types of metal: steel and aluminum. Today we’ll talk about seasoning steel pans,
and we’ll consider aluminum pans in my next column.

Bright finish. Bright-finish steel pans must be seasoned. This can be done by
wiping oil on the interior and exterior surfaces of the pan and placing it in an oven
at about 425°F to polymerize the oil. Seasoning is essential before using this
particular pan, because it allows for improved dough release from the pan after
baking, and the dark color boosts heat absorption during baking, imparting a
superior bake compared to a bright/silvery finish.

Made of pressed steel, these pans are quite durable, but they’re also prone to
rusting with improper care. The applied seasoning may also change in color, going
from the initial light amber color to dark black after extended use. During this period
of adjustment, you may see a difference in the way a pizza bakes until the pan color
settles down at a fairly dark hue. The applied seasoning itself can also be an issue;
it’s easily damaged by the use of a knife or spatula when removing the baked pizza
from the pan. Also, allowing the pan to soak in hot, soapy water can loosen the
seasoning, so take extreme care when washing these pans. Instead of soaking, just
dip the pan in soapy water, scrub gently with a soft plastic-bristle brush, rinse and
sanitize. Finish by wiping it dry with a clean towel and force-drying it in a warm
oven for a few minutes.

If you don’t follow these directions for washing a seasoned pan, the seasoning could
peel off like skin with a bad sunburn, and you’ll need to strip all of the remaining
seasoning from the pan and start over again. Worse, you may get stuck with an
assortment of pans ranging from almost bright and shiny to dark (well-seasoned) in
color—and the baking variations that accompany the differences in pan color.
Additionally, the dark color is nothing more than carbonized oil, and carbon has
been said to be a potential carcinogen. So, if any seasoning goes missing from a
pan, a health inspector may assume that a customer has consumed it as part of the
pizza. The inspector may order you to remove all of the seasoning from all of your
pans before they can be reused. Worse, the seasoning on these pans, if not regularly
used, can turn rancid, affecting a pie’s flavor.

Factory-applied, dark finish. Steel pans are available with a factory-applied, dark-
color (usually green or gray) finish. Be aware that this is not a nonstick finish; it’s
only a color finish intended to improve the pan’s baking properties. These pans still
need to be oiled to achieve a nonstick release from the pan, but, if necessary, they
can be soaked for a short time as part of the washing cycle without fear of damage
to the seasoning. However, you’ll still need to dry these pans promptly to prevent
rusting.

Tom Lehmann is the director of bakery assistance for the American Institute of
Baking (AIB) Need more dough advice? Visit the Dough Information Center at
PMQ.com/dough.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
