Check Your Dough’s Temperature Before Opening
It Into Skins
       pmq.com/check-your-doughs-temperature-before-opening-it-into-skins

Eric                                                                          June 18, 2019


Q: What should the temperature of my dough be when I start opening it into
skins?

A: As we all know, pizza dough becomes noticeably firmer and harder when it’s
cold, so we allow it to warm a little after removing it from the cooler. In most cases,
we can simply let it warm for a certain period of time. However, variations in dough
formulations, shop conditions, and dough opening practices all come into play here,
so it’s best to start by learning how long it takes for your dough ball to warm up
sufficiently.

To start, measure the internal temperature of the dough as soon as you remove it
from the cooler—it will usually be at 40°F or lower. I recommend allowing the
dough balls to warm to an internal temperature of 50°F before opening them into
skins; this will give you a usable window of 2.5 to 3 hours for the dough balls (just
remember to keep them covered).

Once you’ve first measured the dough ball’s internal temperature, make a note of
the time. When the ball’s temperature has warmed to 50°F, note how much time has
elapsed since the first measurement. This will tell you how long to wait after
removing the dough from the cooler before opening it in the future.

Unusually cold shop conditions might dictate a higher internal dough temperature
before opening. A warmer shop will not usually benefit from a colder opening
temperature, but you will have less time for using the dough balls in warmer
conditions, so keep this in mind when pulling dough balls from the cooler; too many
dough balls sitting out in a warm or hot shop will end up overfermenting, creating
more problems.

If you want to work with the dough as quickly as possible after removing it from the
cooler, I suggest preopening the dough balls early in the day and placing them back
into the cooler on screens or trays in a wire tree rack (covered) for use later in the
day. Simply allow the skins to temper at room temperature for about 15 minutes,
then clean them up by restretching to full diameter, and you’re ready to dress and
bake the pizzas. (This is also an excellent way to manage the dough under extremely
warm shop conditions, or if you lack sufficient space to store the dough outside of
the cooler.)

Tom Lehmann was the longtime director of bakery assistance for the American
Institute of Baking and is now a pizza industry consultant.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
