Creating a Pretzel Pizza Crust
   pmq.com/creating-a-pretzel-pizza-crust

Blake Harris                                                              February 27, 2014


QUESTION:
What’s the secret to a good pretzel pizza crust?

ANSWER:
Lately, everyone’s talking about pretzel this and pretzel that. Pretzel buns for
hamburgers and hot dogs are all the rage. I was recently asked how to make pretzel
breadsticks, too. Since pizza dough is so similar to pretzel dough, you can simply
use your pizza dough to make the breadsticks and then brush them with an alkali
solution—that’s how pretzels are made and the secret to their unique signature
flavor and chew.

Historically, people have used sodium hydroxide to make the alkali solution, but it
can inflict caustic burns if it gets onto your skin, and severe eye injury or even
blindness if it gets into your eyes. Therefore, extreme caution must be exercised
when using the sodium hydroxide solution. Instead, I tried a well-known alternative:
baking soda (or sodium
bicarbonate). The baking soda solution imparts many of the pretzel-like
characteristics to the finished product, and it’s much safer to work with. However,
when comparing breadsticks made with the sodium hydroxide solution to those
made with the baking soda solution, there was a slightly different (browner) crust
color associated with the latter, and the flavor was a little different, too. Neither
approach yielded a true “pretzel” taste until salt was applied to the dough right
before baking; both solutions then yielded a flavor that we immediately identified as
the classic pretzel flavor.

So what about pizza crusts? In our trials, we took a standard pizza crust formula and
changed it to a pretzel crust by brushing the edge of the formed skin with a sodium
hydroxide solution in one case and with a sodium bicarbonate solution in the
second case. (We made a 2% sodium hydroxide solution and heated it to 190°F
before brushing it onto the pizza skin.) In both cases the solutions were applied
immediately before baking. We sprinkled kosher salt lightly on the edge and
immediately baked the pizza in an air impingement oven just like our regular pizzas.
(Warning: If you value your baking screens, disks or pans, don’t use them in this
application. As the pie bakes, the highly caustic nature of the sodium hydroxide
solution will eventually destroy any aluminum that it comes into contact with.
Instead, use an ovenable baking tray designed for take-and-bake pizzas, or use a
piece of baking parchment paper to hold the pizza during baking. Either way, spray
release oil on the tray or parchment before you place the dough on it. Failure to do
this will most likely result in the edge of the dough, where the alkali solution has
been applied, sticking to the tray or paper.)

The resulting crusts had a deep, pretzel-like, mahogany color with recognizable
pretzel flavor. We also tried the sodium hydroxide at 6% solution using cold water
and applied the solution cold. This gave a very acceptable crust color and flavor, but
it must be cautioned that both of these solutions are highly caustic and, at the very
least, a respiration mask, goggles and plastic gloves should be worn while working
with these solutions.

As a safer alternative to the sodium hydroxide, we also used a 15% solution of
sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) and applied it to the dough both hot (190°F) and
cold (room temperature/ambient). These solutions are much safer to work with, but
the color and flavor were not quite as good as that from the sodium hydroxide
solutions. The color came out more dark brown than mahogany, and the flavor,
while good, was less identifiable as a pretzel taste. We did not see any significant
advantage to using this soda solution hot as opposed to the cold preparation, so we
recommend the cold/ambient approach for safer handling. Immediately after
baking, we brushed the crust with melted clarified butter to create a gourmet
pretzel-like presentation. (The accompanying photographs show the differences in
color between each of the solutions tested.)

A pretzel crust makes for an interesting variation on standard pizza fare. Testers
found the salted crust to be very acceptable in all cases. Different types of toppings
can be applied to the edge of the pizza skin, including pretzel salt (slightly different
from kosher salt), sesame seeds or poppy seeds. And a simple mustard makes a
great dipping sauce.

Whatever type of caustic solution you use, be sure to follow all precautionary
measures. Do not bake your pretzel crust pizzas on a metal pan; instead, use an
oiled, ovenable paperboard tray or an oiled silicone baking sheet. For the best
pretzel flavor, we think a salt topping works best, but other toppings can be used. Be
sure to use a sanitary, plastic bristle brush to apply the caustic solution to the dough,
because the solution can potentially destroy a natural bristle brush. Finally, when
forming the dough, we got the best appearance and presentation with a raised or
beaded edge as opposed to a flat or nonraised edge.
One last note: I would like to thank my fellow PMQ columnist Jeff Zeak (Zeak’s
Tweaks) for his assistance in the lab as we developed this data and Renee Boeckman
for her assistance with the photography.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
