How to Make Sure Your Pizza Dough Is Properly
Mixed
   pmq.com/mixing-dough

Rick Hynum                                                               September 1, 2015


There are two methods to determine whether your pizza dough has been properly
mixed—a visual test and a physical test. The latter is a bit complicated; it requires
you to form the dough into a ball and stretch it between your thumbs to judge
proper development. It’s a difficult procedure to explain, but the visual test,
fortunately, is both easy to describe and to put into practice.

All you need to do is watch the dough as it develops, paying close attention to its
appearance. The dough will first look to be somewhat gray in color and have a
rough, almost curdled appearance. As the mixing process continues, the color will
begin to brighten, looking more yellow than gray.

At this point, you can stop the mixer and look at the skin on the dough. Ideally, it
should be smooth and without tears; if it still looks somewhat torn, continue mixing
for another minute or so and check again. The dough ball in the mixer should have a
smooth, satiny appearance without tears in the skin. When it takes on this visual
characteristic, the dough has been sufficiently mixed for making your pizzas.

There is an exception, however. If the pizza dough is going to be frozen, it’s better to
mix the dough until a thin gluten film can be formed when the dough is stretched
between the fingers. This is known as the gluten window test. Additional mixing is
needed in this case; that’s because the dough will be frozen without benefit of 24-
hour cold fermentation time, which allows for additional gluten development.

To visualize this, take some pizza dough that has sat in the cooler for 24 or more
hours, cut an egg-size piece off and stretch it out to form a gluten film, which by
now should be pretty well developed. The gluten film can be stretched so thin as to
allow you to see fine skin details through the gluten film.

The late Tom Lehmann was the longtime director of bakery assistance for the
American Institute of Baking before retiring to become a full-time consultant. Prior
to his death in 2020, he contributed hundreds of dough-related columns and
articles to PMQ.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
