How to Keep Your Pizzeria's Wood Work Surface
in Tip-Top Condition
   pmq.com/maintaining-wood-work-surfaces

Rick Hynum                                                                February 22, 2022


    Wood-work surfaces for pizzerias should not be washed in the
    conventional way, advises Tom “The Dough Doctor” Lehmann.
    Keep in mind that any water applied to the surface should be removed
    as quickly as possible to keep it from getting absorbed into the wood.

Related: How to achieve the perfect dough mix

Q: We open our dough balls on a wood surface. But after we wash it, the
surface gets rough and needs to be sanded out. Can you offer some advice?

A: Wood work surfaces should not be washed in the conventional way. Doing so
allows the wood to absorb water, resulting in the raising of the wood grain and,
hence, the roughness you are experiencing. The best way to maintain your wood
surface is to clean it regularly using a metal-blade bench scraper. It should be held
at about a 25° angle when scraping the surface. This allows the scraper’s square
edge to effectively remove any stuck-on material from the surface while at the same
time removing any errant wood fibers. yields a very smooth surface over time.

When the surface must be washed, remember that any water applied to the surface
should be removed as quickly as possible. You want to prevent any water from
being absorbed into the wood. The best way to do this is to apply warm water to the
surface and immediately scrub it with a plastic scrubbing pad or plastic bristly
scrubbing brush (a pot brush works well in this application). Then, using your bench
scraper, scrape the surface—with the grain, never against it—to remove the water
and debris from the surface. The bench scraper will act something like a squeegee in
removing the water, while the square edge of the blade will effectively remove any
material that’s sticking to the wood.

After thoroughly scraping, wipe off any water and buff off the surface using a clean,
damp towel (turning frequently), then wipe it dry using a clean, dry towel. Allow the
surface to air-dry for a few minutes and apply a coat of mineral oil to the wood to
seal it. It might take several applications if the wood hasn’t been sealed recently. In
that case, apply the oil and allow it to soak in, then apply again as needed until the
oil begins to puddle on the surface. After an hour, wipe off any remaining oil and
buff the surface using a clean towel. The bench is now ready for use.
You might want to do this at night before you leave the shop so the oil has a chance
to thoroughly soak into the wood overnight; then after a quick wipe with a clean
towel in the morning, the surface will again be ready to use.

For daily cleaning, first scrape the surface, then apply some hot water and scrape it
once again. Wipe off any residual water and finish with a light application of mineral
oil rubbed into the wood. The deeper cleaning procedure as outlined above
generally only needs to be done once a week.

Note: If you use the bench scraper incorrectly, a beautiful wood bench top can
literally be destroyed or left in a condition where only complete resurfacing will
restore it to working condition. A new bench scraper has an edge that’s perfectly
perpendicular to the sides of the blade—that’s right, the edge is square, not beveled
like a knife, and the ends of the blade are rounded to prevent gouging the wood.
With use, the blade becomes dull, actually rounded in shape as the square corners
are worn off. This results in the need to apply additional force to the scraper to get it
to perform properly, and that’s where the trouble begins. There is a distinct
probability that the wood will be gouged as you keep adjusting the angle at which it
is held trying to get it to work.

Instead, just re-sharpen the blade, but be sure to put a square edge on the blade, not
a tapered knife-like edge. The easiest way is to use a long, fine-cut file laid on a flat
surface, then hold the scraper perpendicular to the file and pass the scraper over the
cutting edges of the file several times to re-establish the square edge. Wipe off the
blade to remove any metal particles, then wash and sanitize and you’re good to go.
Do this procedure once a week or as needed to keep the bench scraper performing
as it should.

With time, you will find that the rounded corners of the scraper blade will become
more pointed/squared. When this starts happening, just make several strokes with
the file over each corner in such a manner as to maintain the rounded profile. Now
you know the secret to keeping your wood work surface in top condition and
maintaining your bench scrapers as they were designed to be.

Before he passed in December 2020, Tom Lehmann was a longtime contributor to
PMQ Pizza Magazine and served as the director of bakery assistance for the
American Institute of Baking.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
