In Lehmann's terms: mix-ins - PMQ Pizza
   pmq.com/in-lehmanns-terms-mix-ins

Blake Harris                                                            November 1, 2010


QUESTION:

We recently changed over to using active dry yeast when making our dough. We
hydrate it in 100°F water for 10 minutes, but we are unsure if we can add it to the
remainder of the water, which is 65°F, or if we should keep it separate from the cold
water.

ANSWER:

Once you have hydrated the active dry yeast (ADY), you can add it to the
colder dough water without any problem. What I normally do is pour the hydrated
yeast suspension into the mixing bowl; then, as I add the colder dough water, I
pour it into the container in which I hydrated the ADY to rinse it out. This gets all
of the yeast into the mixing bowl and helps clean the yeast bowl at the same time.

QUESTION:

We use fresh yeast in making our dough. There has been some discussion as to how
long we should leave the yeast in the water before we add it to the dough.

ANSWER:

There seems to be a common misconception that fresh
yeast/compressed yeast/block yeast needs to be suspended in water before it can
be added to the dough. This is not the case at all. The best way to add compressed
yeast to the dough is to crumble it into pieces as you add it to the mixing bowl. The
yeast can be added directly to the flour just before you begin mixing. The normal
mixing action will be more than sufficient to thoroughly disperse the yeast
throughout the dough mass.

There is one exception to this—if you happen to be using a vertical cutter mixer
(VCM). In this case, you will need to suspend the yeast in the water prior to adding
the flour. This is best accomplished by first adding the water to the mixer bowl, then
adding the compressed yeast, and running the mixer for several seconds to suspend
the yeast in the water; then add the flour and remaining ingredients, and mix in
your normal manner. This is required due to the extremely short mixing time of 70
to 90 seconds when using a VCM.
QUESTION:

What effect will adding baking powder have on my pizza dough?

ANSWER:

Baking powder is a complete chemical leavening system: Just add water and heat,
and you can get a rise. Baking powder is comprised of both soda and acid
components that, when hydrated and heated, will fully react, leaving a neutral pH
(7.0) after generating all of its carbon dioxide. Its effect on flavor in non-yeast-
leavened products, such as cakes and cookies, can be anything from minimal to
characterizing. In yeast-leavened systems, the act of yeast fermentation creates
certain acids as a by-product, and these acids will react with the soda portion of the
baking powder. This results in an early release of carbon dioxide, so the full effect of
the baking powder is not realized; but, even more importantly, the acid part of the
baking powder is now left as a by-product that affects the taste, aroma and
sometimes even the color of the finished crust. Typically, the resulting flavor is
characterized like that of a baking powder biscuit with a slightly sharp or bitter
aftertaste. To get around these issues, and still be able to use baking powder in
yeast-leavened products, fat-encapsulated chemical leavening systems have been
developed. These are complete leavening systems, meaning that upon complete
reaction there is neither an acid nor alkali residual, so there is minimal impact
upon the flavor or color characteristics of the finished crust.

Tom Lehmann is the director of bakery assistance for the American Institute of Baking (AIB).
Need more dough advice? Visit the Dough Information Center at PMQ.com/dough.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
