In Lehmann's terms: dough sheeting, milk addition
and hard water
   pmq.com/in-lehmanns-terms-dough-sheeting-milk-addition-and-hard-water

Blake Harris                                                                 August 1, 2010


How do you use a sheeter to help with forming a hand-tossed dough?

ANSWER:

When setting the roll gap on the sheeter/roller, adjust it so the dough is sheeted out
to only about 2⁄3 of the desired finished diameter; then finish opening the dough by
hand tossing. This method helps to keep your dough skins from having an overly
thin center section, and if you are not proficient at opening dough balls completely
by hand, it will increase your speed while allowing you to develop the
necessary proficiency to ultimately open the entire dough ball by hand.

QUESTION:

I’ve heard that if we add milk to our dough formula, we should first scald it by
heating it to a fast simmer. Why?

ANSWER:

Liquid milk and most dry milk contain certain whey proteins that are detrimental to
dough quality in that they produce a certain weakening of the dough structure. This
problem is easily addressed by heating the milk to denature the offending whey
proteins. To scald liquid milk, simply put it into a suitably sized container and heat
until it just comes to a fast simmer or a light boil. To heat dry milk, add water to it,
and then proceed with scalding. Another option is to purchase bakery-grade, high
heat treatment dry milk solids from any bakery ingredient supplier. This product
has already been heat treated, and requires no further heat treatment prior to use.

QUESTION:

What are the affects of hard and soft water and chlorine on pizza dough?

ANSWER:

All other factors being equal, soft water will produce pizza dough that is softer and
slightly tacky as compared to dough made with hard water. Actually, hard water is
better for dough than soft water. If you’re going to be putting in a water softening
system, I’d suggest putting in a sink where you can draw hard water just for the
dough. This line would be installed at a point before the water softener, and then the
rest of the store’s water supply can be softened. As for chlorine, you
shouldn’t experience any ill effects on the dough, but you might want to consider an
activated carbon type of filter to remove the chlorine taste from the water if it will be
used in any of your beverages, such as coffee or tea, or in making ice for soft drinks.

Tom Lehmann is the director of bakery assistance for the American Institute of Baking (AIB).
Need more dough advice? Visit the Dough Information Center at PMQ.com/dough.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
