Oil vs. Shortening: Solving a Slippery, Sticky
Dilemma
       pmq.com/in-lehmanns-terms-oil-vs-shortening-solving-a-slippery-sticky-dilemma

Eric                                                                                   January 3, 2020


When making pan pizzas, does it make a difference which type of oil or fat
is used in the pan?

This is actually a two-part question, and the short answer to both is yes. The type of
oil used in the pan can impact the flavor of the finished pan pizza. I recommend
using either canola or peanut oil due to both oils’ high-heat performance properties
and bland flavor profiles.

When you’re looking at using oil vs. shortening in the pan, the differences will be
much more pronounced. If oil is used, it can be nearly impossible to open the dough
ball in the pan; the dough will just keep sliding around and won’t stay put. If you’re
going to use oil, I recommend opening the dough into a skin first and then placing
the dough skin in the pan. Even with that approach, after 30 or more minutes of
proofing, you will most likely still need to carefully stretch the dough a bit more to
get it to fully fit the pan.

When you use shortening or a “plastic” fat in the pan, the dough actually adheres to
the fat, making it much easier to hand-form the dough to the pan. Once the dough
becomes “stuck” to the shortening, it stays put long enough for the dough to fully
relax. Hence, in all probability, you won’t need to do any more fitting of the dough to
the pan. This is especially useful when forming a raised edge on the pan crust.

There is also a major difference between how oil and shortening affect the finished
crust. Shortening will lend it an outer crust characteristic that’s very similar to that of
a loaf of white pan bread. With oil, on the other hand, the crust will have a distinct
fried characteristic.

If your customers are sensitive to fat or object to what might be perceived as a
“greasy” or “oily” pizza, you should reconsider the use of oil in the pan. The oil will
get on diners’ fingers, napkins, and possibly even on the bottom of your pizza boxes
after baking. Shortening, on the other hand, will give your pizza a much drier, less
oily perception, regardless of the amount used. And since shortening reverts back to
its original crystalline state upon cooling, the crust is never perceived as greasy or
oily, even in a delivery/carryout situation.
Tom Lehmann was the longtime director of bakery assistance for the American
Institute of Baking and is now a pizza industry consultant.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
