Problems with dough and gel: Tom looks closer
   pmq.com/problems-with-dough-and-gel-tom-looks-closer

Blake Harris                                                               September 1, 2003


Question:
We're plagued with the presence of a gel or gum line just beneath the sauce on
many of our pizzas. The problem seems to be worse on weekends and during busy,
high production periods. What's causing this problem, and how can we correct it?
Also, our pizza seems to loose its crispiness very soon after coming out of the oven.
Are these two problems related, or are they separate problems?

Answer:
We've studied the gum line problem extensively, at AIB, and we have found the
problem to be common only to certain circumstances. Once you've identified the
cause, the corrective action is pretty straightforward. Below, I've identified the
various causes and the suggested corrective action.

   1. If you are in the habit of pre-saucing your pizza skins in preparation for the
      rush periods. This can allow time for your sauce to separate with the water
      migrating into the dough. Once in the dough, and covered with sauce and
      cheese, it is impossible to bake this water soaked portion of the dough to the
      consistency of anything but wet pasta. If you insist upon the need to pre-sauce
      your skins, we have found that the application of a light coating of oil to the
      surface of the dough goes a long way towards slowing this problem down, but
      given sufficient time, the water will still manage to soak into the dough, so if
      you go this route, try to limit the time that the dough is allowed to stand
      between saucing and baking.
   2. Another causative factor is excessive thinning of the sauce. I can't tell you how
      much or how little water to add to a sauce to thin it down for use, as this will
      depend greatly upon the type and solids content of the tomato products used
      in making your sauce. A good indicator that you might have too much water in
      your sauce is the constant need to stir the sauce during use. Think about it. If
      the sauce begins to separate in the bowl as you are using it, what will it do on
      the pizza? A good test to determine if this might be the cause of the gum/gel
      line is to apply only tomato sauce to the pizza, right out of the can. Then apply
      the normal amount of cheese, and other toppings and bake the pizza in the
      normal manner. If no gum/gel line developed, separation of your sauce should
      be highly suspect. If the gum/gel line is still present, in all its glory, you will
      need to look elsewhere for the solution.
  3. A common problem that crops up from time to time is that of "fast baking".
     When pizzas are fast baked at high temperatures, the crust might turn a golden
    brown in color, and the cheese might be lightly browned too, but the inside of
    the dough has not been in the oven long enough to allow it to be fully or
    thoroughly baked. This was a very common problem when the new, more
    efficient, conveyor ovens first came out. They were being heavily promoted on
    the basis that they could dramatically reduce the baking time of a pizza. Well, if
    you consider a pizza to be fully baked when its brown on the outside, then they
    lived up to their claims. For the most part, we found that these new, efficient
    ovens could brown the crusts faster than anything we had previously seen, but
    within the baking times being promoted (that being long enough to make the
    crust brown) the interior of the crust was still only partially baked, and certainly
    didn't achieve the amount of bake necessary to ensure a crispy crust with
    holding power at the customer's table or on a serving line. To se if this might be
    the source of your problem, reduce the baking temperature by 50°F, and
    lengthen the baking time by one to two minutes. This may not fully correct the
    problem, but if you see an improvement, it would be an indication that you're
     on the right track, and a few more "tweaks" to the baking parameters might be
     in order.
  4. Lastly, we have occasionally seen dough formulas that were out of balance in
     reference to sugar content. In short, the sugar level was too high. So how did
     this happen? The most common scenario is where a new oven is purchased. In
    order for the dough to color up to the desired level in the old oven, the sugar
    content had to be increased slightly. Old and failing electric deck ovens can lead
    you down this path if you are not careful, then when you replace that old oven
    with a new, highly efficient, state of the art baking machine, you adjust the
    baking parameters to give you a crust with all of the same outward
    appearances of the crusts made in the old oven. This was probably not the right
    thing to do. I bet you were impressed by the faster bake time, and uniform crust
    color, but you lost something called crispiness in the trade. If your sugar levels
    are at, or above 2 percent of the flour weight, first try cutting the amount of
    sugar added to the dough in half, or you might even reduce the sugar level to
    just 1 percent of the weight of the flour. This will reduce the rate at which the
    dough browns during baking, allowing you to simply bake the crust a bit
    longer, resulting in a better, more thorough bake, and a crispier crust
    characteristic.


Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
