Quick-Fire Questions with The Dough Doctor
   pmq.com/quick-fire-questions-with-the-dough-doctor

Rick Hynum                                                                December 3, 2018


I tried making my pizza dough using malt syrup rather than the usual white
sugar but, over time, my dough became very sticky. Is there a solution?

You are most likely using a diastatic malt syrup, which is enzyme-active and is
nothing more than a malt-flavored sugar syrup. The diastatic malt syrup contains
amylase enzymes, which hydrate a portion of the starch into sugar, and that’s
responsible for the stickiness you’re experiencing. Check the product label to see if it
mentions anything about being diastatic or enzyme-active. If so, replace it with a
nondiastatic/non-enzyme-active malt syrup.

I see that some operators add the flour first to the mixing bowl, while others
add the water first. Does it really make a difference which is added first?

Yes. When water is added first, you get more consistent hydration of the flour, which
reduces mixing time. In tests that I did many years ago, I found that by adding water
first, the total dough mixing time was reduced, on average, by a full minute. When
we were making doughs with very short mixing times, such as cracker-type doughs,
the flour was always more uniformly hydrated when water was added to the bowl
first.

I am using a planetary-type mixer, and the dough keeps climbing up on the
hook, where it doesn’t get any kneading action at all. What can I do, aside
from stopping the mixer to cut the dough off the hook?

This is a common problem with the type of hook that’s referred to, because of its
shape, as a J hook. The problem is usually worse when mixing very small or large
doughs, or when mixing at low speed. Try reducing the dough size by about 25%,
and mix the dough at medium speed if possible. In the case of small dough sizes, the
dough just wraps onto the hook and rides around the bowl, with the hook getting
little or no mixing action. In this case, you will need to increase the dough size and
again mix at medium speed. You might also try oiling the top 1/3 of the dough
hook. If these tactics fail to address the problem, your only option will be to see if
you can buy a reverse spiral dough arm for your mixer. With this, you can mix any
reasonably sized dough, and the mixing action will be more efficient, resulting in
shorter mixing times, as well as improved consistency between doughs.
I attended one of your presentations some time ago, and I remember you
saying that all-purpose flour should not be used for pizzerias. Why is that?

I’m not against using all-purpose flour, but it tends to be quite variable between
different manufacturers. Therefore, it’s difficult to say with certainty how any one
brand will perform when making pizzas. I like to look at hotel and restaurant flours
as the lower end of the strength spectrum and work up from there. Those flours are
generally equal between different manufacturers, just as their bread and high-
gluten flours are consistent. This means that you have the ability to change brands,
knowing that there won’t be any huge surprises in store for you.

We have been experimenting with making cracker-type doughs and are
seeing a lot of inconsistencies between them. Is this common with cracker
doughs, which are low-absorption with a short mixing time?

No, it is not common. If you are using instant dry yeast (IDY) in the dough
formulation, this might be where the inconsistency is coming from. While IDY is a
great product, it does need to be used correctly. In a cracker-type dough with less
than 50% absorption and only about two minutes of total mixing time, this would
not be the best of conditions to add the IDY in its dry form. Instead, try putting the
IDY into a small amount of 95˚ to 100˚F water, stirring to achieve a complete
suspension of the yeast. Pour the yeast suspension into the cold water in the mixing
bowl. By doing this, you will see more consistent results between the dough—and
possibly a better finished crust, too.

I’ve heard and read that spiral mixers work really well for mixing pizza
dough. What is your opinion?

I really like them for mixing pizza dough. They’re strong mixers, nearly bulletproof in
all aspects of longevity and operation, and they will effectively mix a wide range of
different dough sizes with ease. However, there are some issues with spiral mixers.
They’re dedicated dough mixers, and few have an attachment hub, so they can’t do
double duty—for example, mixing sauce or powering an attachment for slicing,
dicing or shredding. Some have a removable bowl, which is a nice feature to have,
as is a plastic drain plug in the bowl. (If I had my way, every spiral mixer would have
a removable plastic drain plug in the bottom of the bowl to facilitate cleaning.
Without one, you will need to bail the water out of the bowl as if you were in a
sinking rowboat.)
Then there is the issue of speeds. Some spiral mixers have only one speed, while
others have two speeds, and some even have a reverse speed. I’d opt for a two-
speed model, but if that wasn’t an option, I would be just as happy with a single-
speed machine. Finally, if you’re thinking of upgrading to a spiral mixer, consider
keeping your old mixer for light-duty “retirement” chores, like mixing your sauce
and powering your attachment. Then you’ll have the best of both worlds!

Tom Lehmann is the former director of bakery assistance for the American Institute
of Baking (AIB). Need more dough advice? Visit the Dough Information Center at
PMQ.com/dough.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
