Salvaging dough for better use
   pmq.com/salvaging-dough-for-better-use

Blake Harris                                                                  July 1, 2004


Question:
We are using a frozen dough ball to make our pizza crusts. Occasionally we end up
with some old, out-of-date product that we were not able to use within the specified
shelf-life period. When we have tried to use the dough we found that it did not
perform very well. It failed to rise as well as expected. Is there some way that we can
salvage this dough rather than having to throw it into the trash?

Answer:
Yes, there is a way that you might be able to salvage that dough rather than having
to toss it out. We have done this many times before and it works well for all kinds of
bulk, frozen, yeast raised dough. Allow the dough to slack out (thaw) in the cooler
overnight. Then put the appropriate number of dough balls in the mixing bowl to
achieve the correct dough weight for the mixer bowl capacity. Based upon the total
weight of the dough that you’ve put into the mixing bowl, add 0.75 percent
compressed yeast (0.25 percent IDY) or 0.375 percent ADY to the dough. The
compressed yeast and the IDY can be added directly to the dough. The ADY will
need to be pre-hydrated in a small portion of water at 105˚F for a few minutes
before adding it to the dough. Mix the dough at low speed for a minute or two, then
change to medium speed and mix the dough just until it develops a smooth
appearance. Immediately divide the dough into desired weight pieces, form into
balls, place the dough balls into a dough box and lightly wipe with salad oil. Allow
the dough balls to set out at room temperature for two hours before using the
dough to make your pizza skins. Or, if you wish, you can place the dough boxes in
the cooler (cross stacked) for two hours, then down stack the dough boxes, covering
the top box to prevent the dough from drying out. The dough can be removed from
the cooler later during the day for use. Be sure to allow the dough to warm at room
temperature for one and a half to two hours before using it. I would suggest that
you try to use all of the dough within the same day that you re-mixed it. My
personal results when holding this dough over from one day to the next has been
inconsistent at best. Probably the best time to re-mix your out-of-date frozen dough
(thawed) is in the early morning hours. This way you can have some of the dough
ready to use for the lunch time trade, and the refrigerated portion can be used over
the remaining portion of the day.
Question:
In some of your articles I’ve seen you make reference to what you call a “sponge-
dough” process for making pizza and other products. What is this process?

Answer:
The sponge-dough process is one that bakers have used for many years, but it is
little-heard-of in the pizza industry. Making your dough by the sponge-dough
process entails taking a portion of the flour, all of the yeast and a portion of the
water, mixing it together and allowing it to ferment for an extended period of time.
This is called the “sponge.” After the fermentation period, the sponge is mixed with
the remainder of ingredients called for in the formula. This is called the “dough”
stage. Once the sponge and the dough have been mixed together to form the
desired dough mass, it is called a “dough.” This dough would be handled in a
normal handling procedure for making pizza skins.

The greatest advantage to the sponge-dough procedure is that it allows for the
development of fermentation flavors and attributes to the total dough mass, without
developing an excessively gassy dough characteristic as would be the case when
using a straight dough procedure (the customary procedure for making pizza
dough). In pizza dough production a good sponge ratio is 60/40, meaning that 60
percent of the total flour should be put into the sponge with all of the yeast and 40
percent of the sponge flour weight as water. Typically, this water would be at about
70˚F, or whatever is necessary to give a mixed sponge with a temperature of 75 to
80˚F. The sponge ingredients are combined together in the mixing bowl and mixed
for four minutes at low speed and two minutes at medium speed. The mixed sponge
is then removed from the mixing bowl and placed into a suitably large container
where it is allowed to ferment at room temperature for three to five hours, with four
hours being about the norm. After the fermentation period, the sponge is placed
back into the mixing bowl along with the remainder of the formula ingredients.
When adding the remainder of the water, it should be as cold as possible (ice water)
to give a finished dough with a temperature in the range of 80 to 85˚F. Some further
adjustment in the water temperature might be needed to get the finished dough in
this temperature range.

With the fermented sponge and all of the dough ingredients in the mixer, mix at low
speed for four minutes, then at medium speed just until the dough takes on a
smooth, satiny appearance. The dough is now completely mixed and should have a
finished temperature in the range of 80 to 85˚F. At this point the dough can be
divided into desired weight pieces and formed into balls. Place the dough balls into
dough boxes and wipe with a little salad oil.
TO USE THE DOUGH ON THE SAME DAY
Leave the dough boxes out at room temperature and cover to prevent drying. The
dough balls will be ready to use in about 45 minutes and will remain usable over
the following 90 minutes or so. A good way to use this method is to form the dough
balls into skins as soon as the dough is ready for forming, then place the formed
skins in the cooler for use later in the day. When using those refrigerated skins, be
sure to allow them to warm a little at room temperature before dressing them and
putting them into the oven. If you’re making a take-and-bake pizza, you can use
them directly from the cooler to build your pizzas.

TO USE THE DOUGH ON THE FOLLOWING DAY
Take the boxes of dough to the cooler and cross stack to facilitate cooling of the
dough balls. After about two hours, the dough boxes can be down stacked and the
top box covered. The dough will be ready to be used on the following day. To use the
dough, remove a quantity of dough balls from the cooler, leave them in the dough
boxes to warm at room temperature until they reach approximately 50˚F. The dough
balls can then be shaped into skins and used in the preferred manner. This dough is
best if not held for more than one day in the cooler. Any remaining dough left at the
end of the day can be made into par-baked bread sticks or focaccia bread.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
