Solving the soggy pizza problem
   pmq.com/solving-the-soggy-pizza-problem

Blake Harris                                                              August 31, 2014


QUESTION:
We have been struggling with soggy pizzas and soft crusts for some time
now. No matter what we do, we can’t fix the problem. We bake our pies in
deck ovens at 550°F, and we probably use more toppings than we should,
but that’s what our customers want. Any suggestions?

ANSWER:

This is a tough one. The logical approach would be to use fewer vegetable toppings,
but that isn’t an option for you. By reducing your oven temperature to a range
between 475°F and 500°F, you can bake the pizzas longer, potentially developing a
thicker, drier bottom crust while allowing more time for the excess moisture to
evaporate from the top of the pizza. To me, however, the ultimate fix—and the one
you probably don’t want to hear—is to replace your existing ovens with air
impingement ovens, either in the form of air deck ovens or conveyor air
impingement ovens. The high air velocity in the air impingement ovens will act
much like a hair dryer, helping to evaporate moisture from the top of the pie during
baking and yielding a significantly drier product coming out of the oven.

QUESTION:

We use fresh tomato slices on many of our pies, but they contribute a
significant amount of moisture to the top of the pizzas. What is the best way
to address this problem?

ANSWER:
There are a couple of things that can be done to keep the tomato slices from
watering out all over your pie. For starters, you could thin-slice the tomato into
pieces no thicker than ¼”, but I’d say that 3/16” is even better. With this approach,
the moisture will be flashed off the tomato as it is released, making for a drier
finished pizza.
You could also place the tomato slices in a container with pieces of absorbent paper
or towels between each layer. This helps to draw a good deal of the moisture out of
the tomato before it even gets onto the pizza, thus reducing the amount of water
that’s released during baking. You should also try to keep the tomato pieces on the
very top of the pizza, allowing for maximum exposure to heat and airflow.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
