Tips for a faster slice
   pmq.com/tips-for-a-faster-slice

Blake Harris                                                                  April 30, 2014


QUESTION:
We have an opportunity to open a pizza shop in a mall food court. The store will be
small, and we would like to sell pizza by the slice. In your opinion, what is the best
way to ensure the fastest turnaround on orders when dealing with slices?

ANSWER:

By far, you can achieve the fastest turnaround by using prepared pizzas that are cut
into slices and stored in a temperature-/humidity-controlled cabinet for immediate
sale. (A number of such cabinets are designed specifically for pizza storage.)
However, rather than selling the slices directly from the cabinet, I would recommend
that you first run them through a small deck oven for a minute or less to refresh
them and add some crispiness to the bottom of the slice. For optimal results, reheat
them while you are processing the customer’s payment and preparing his drink
order. By taking this approach, you can usually hand over a fresh, hot, tasty slice to
the customer in about 60 seconds.

The only downside is that your menu will be limited—only the pizzas that are
already in the holding cabinet will be available, and you won’t be able to handle
special orders with different or additional toppings. But if you’re looking for a fast
turnaround, I don’t think you can beat 60 to 90 seconds!

For the type of operation you’ve got in mind, we normally start during the
preopening hours and make par-baked pizza skins with half of the sauce applied.
These pies can usually be stored on a covered rack at room temperature until
they’re needed to prepare a complete pizza. To prepare the pizza, you need only
apply the remainder of the sauce and the desired toppings and then bake it. The
par-baking actually seems to help the slices hold up a little better in the
temperature/humidity storage cabinet. As soon as the pizzas are baked, you can
slice them and place the slices in the holding cabinet for up to about two hours.

QUESTION:

We always open our dough balls into pizza skins by table stretching. What is the
best bench-top surface for this method of opening the dough balls?
ANSWER:
I think I’ve worked with just about every possible surface over the years. For this
method of opening the dough balls, I’ve found that marble/granite or manmade
quartz work very well, but both options are also quite expensive. The one surface
that works well and doesn’t cost a lot is stainless steel. If a stainless steel bench top
works with the ambiance of your pizza store, it will be hard to beat for cost,
performance and durability.




Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
