What's the Difference Between Malted and
Unmalted Flours?
   pmq.com/working-with-unmalted-flours

Blake Harris                                                               October 1, 2014


What is the difference between malted and unmalted flour? Malted flour contains
sprouted barley malt, a source of amylase, which is an enzyme that breaks some of
the flour’s starch down into sugars. The yeast uses these sugars as nutrients to
support fermentation. Unmalted flours don’t contain sprouted barley malt, but some
pizza chefs prefer unmalted flours because they allow the pizzas to be baked at high
temperatures (700° to 900°F) in wood-fired ovens without developing excessive
char on the crust (the result of sugar formation due to hydrolysis by the malt).

Unmalted flours have a disadvantage, however, if the dough undergoes several days
of slow fermentation under refrigeration. In this case, all of the available nutrients
that the yeast feed upon can be depleted, resulting in loss of yeast, overly extensible
dough, and less than stellar yeast performance. This nutrient loss often leads to the
development of the dreaded gum line.

Fortunately, the problem can be solved by adding 2% sugar or 0.25% diastatic
(enzyme active) malt powder to your dough formulation. Either of these additions
will provide sufficient fermentable sugar to support fermentation for up to a week in
the cooler. They will also aid in crust color development if you bake the pizzas at
temperatures lower than those encountered in wood-fired ovens.

For the record, there is no benefit to adding extra diastatic malt to flour that has
already been malted at the flour mill. In some cases, the additional diastatic malt can
result in dough that feels sticky or tacky and proves difficult to handle. For the most
part, people make this mistake because they’re trying to achieve a malt flavor in
their dough. But diastatic malt won’t do the trick—they need to use nondiastatic
(non-enzyme active) malt. This type of malt has been specially treated to eliminate
the enzyme activity responsible for converting starch to sugar; hence, it’s used either
as a sugar or as a combination sugar and flavor enhancer.

The upshot? Just keep in mind that there are two different types of malt—diastatic
(enzyme active) and nondiastatic (non-enzyme active). Each has a different function
in the dough, so you’ll need to select the one that provides the function you want.
The late Tom “The Dough Doctor” Lehmann was a regular contributor to PMQ and
served as director of bakery assistance for the American Institute of Baking. This
article originally appeared in the October 2014 issue of PMQ.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
