Can I Use a Dough Press for a Cracker-Crust or
Crispy-Crust Pizza?
   pmq.com/thin-crust-pizza-dough-press

Rick Hynum                                                                February 22, 2022


     There are a couple of ways to create dough with the soft, relaxed
     characteristics that make it amenable to using a dough press.
     If you are cold-fermenting your dough, consider allowing it to remain in
     the cooler for two or more days before pressing it, which will also
     contribute to a great tasting crust.

Related: How to achieve the perfect pizza crust edge

By Tom Lehmann

Q: Is it possible to make a thin cracker-crust or crispy-type crust using a
dough press to form the skins? We have been trying to do this, but the
dough tends to be far too stiff to press out.

A: Yes, it is possible, but it will take some effort and experimentation on your part.
The key to successful pressing of the dough is to have a soft and relaxed dough
consistency at the time of pressing. But the low dough absorption used in making
dough for a crispy or cracker-type crust is highly counterproductive, as you have
found. The solution is to either ferment the dough until it’s sufficiently relaxed and
extensible for pressing, or to add a reducing agent to the dough.

First, let’s look at the fermentation approach. This is best accomplished by allowing
the dough to ferment sufficiently long to develop the desired pressing
characteristics. If you are cold-fermenting the dough, this might mean allowing it to
remain in the cooler for two or more days, which will also contribute to a great
tasting crust. However, if you aren’t set up to allow for that kind if fermentation
time, you can experiment with higher finished dough temperatures to achieve more
fermentation in a shorter time. One trick that sometimes works well is to simply
remove the dough from the cooler and allow it to remain at room temperature for a
longer time (normally two to four hours) before pressing.

The other approach requires the use of a reducing agent, an additive used for
making a dough softer and more extensible). Possibilities include L-cysteine (PZ-44),
dead yeast (Reduce 190), deodorized vegetable powder/onion and garlic (Basic
Natural) or even just the addition of your “off-the-shelf” onion and/or garlic powder
if you don’t mind the flavor contribution. All of these products will work, although
some work better than others, and should give you a dough consistency that is
ready for pressing usually within two hours of mixing the dough.

Note: While there are significant differences between the above-mentioned
reducing agents, the L-cysteine (an amino acid/protein building block) and dead
yeast/glutathione (an amino acid/protein building block) are both very fast-acting
and can completely liquefy your dough if used incorrectly. The vegetable powder-
based products behave more gently, but they also have a limited softening effect
upon the dough, which, in some cases, might make them easier to use.

It’s also possible to experiment with the amount used to find a level that will provide
for up to 24 hours of cold fermentation time without turning the dough into
something resembling a thick pudding. The key here is to experiment with the
reducing agent to find a level that will give you the dough characteristics needed for
pressing while still fitting into operation reasonably well.

Before he passed in December 2020, Tom Lehmann was a longtime contributor to
PMQ Pizza Magazine and served as the director of bakery assistance for the
American Institute of Baking.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
