Creating a Lighter Deep-Dish Pizza Crust
   pmq.com/deep-dish-pizza-crust

Rick Hynum                                                                 February 8, 2022


     Try using flour with a lower protein content, such as an all-purpose flour
     or H&R, a winter wheat bread flour.
     By mixing your regular pizza flour with an all-purpose flour, you can
     create a flour blend that works well for your specific application and
     shop conditions.

Related: How to solve your pizza dough’s bubble troubles

Q: Our deep-dish pizzas are too tough and chewy. What’s the secret to a
light, tender deep-dish crust?

A: This problem can be addressed in a number of ways. One way would be to add
enough reducing agent—such as L-cysteine, glutathione or protease enzyme—to
the dough to sufficiently weaken the flour protein. This will yield a more tender
crust, but the dough will have a very short shelf life, both refrigerated and at room
temperature, and it will be more prone to inconsistent performance due to
temperature differences of the finished (mixed) dough. You may also have flavor
problems, and dough stickiness will likely be a major complaint.

You could also use fermentation to mellow the flour proteins for a more tender
finished crust. This will require paying careful attention to the finished dough
temperature and fermentation time; we usually see some combination of both room
temperature and refrigerated fermentation temperature employed, although a
longer refrigerated fermentation time—five or more days—will sometimes do the
trick. However, such a long storage time in the cooler can be problematic.

In my experience, it’s better to use flour with a lower protein content, such as an all-
purpose flour or H&R, a winter wheat bread flour. My preferred strategy is to create
a blend of your regular pizza flour with an all-purpose flour. Thus, you can create a
flour blend that works well for your specific application and shop conditions.

I was recently in a pizzeria where we were developing a deep-dish pizza crust. Using
their regular flour (12.6% protein), the finished crust was unacceptably tough and
chewy. But when we made it from a blend of 50% regular pizza flour and 50% all-
purpose flour, the resulting crust had exactly the eating properties we were looking
for. The crust was light and very tender, and it retained these properties even after
the pizza had cooled down through a simulated delivery or carryout!

When using a blended flour, you can usually follow your regular dough
management procedure. You just need to make sure that you proof the dough to
the desired height before dressing it as a pizza for baking or par-baking or before
storing it in the cooler for later use. To determine the right mix of your regular flour
and the substitute flour, you’ll probably have to experiment a little bit. It will depend
on a number of factors, such as the strength of your regular flour, the strength of
the substitute flour and your dough management procedure.

Before he passed in December 2020, Tom Lehmann was a longtime contributor to
PMQ Pizza Magazine and served as the director of bakery assistance for the
American Institute of Baking. This article appeared in a previous issue of PMQ.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
