Dough Tips for Start-Ups: How To Calculate Bakers
Percent
   pmq.com/what-exactly-is-bakers-percent

Rick Hynum                                                                     June 25, 2024


If you’re opening your first-ever pizza shop, you’ve probably heard about bakers
percent, but you might not know what it means. Or maybe you’re self-taught and
simply never learned about it at all. Let’s take a closer look at this powerful tool for
pizza makers and bakers.

When a dough is given in bakers percent, it is very easy to immediately see any
issues with ingredient amounts. For example, if a dough based on 40 pounds of
flour contained 17 ounces of salt, what would we know about this dough formula? If
presented in bakers’ percent, we would immediately see the amount of salt is 2.65%
—about as much as we might want to use in our dough, and certainly enough to
require an adjustment in yeast level (making it higher) if a faster fermenting is
needed.

Bakers percent also allows us to manipulate the size of the dough very easily. In this
case, all we need to do is decide how much dough we want to make or how much
flour we want to use. With either of those two pieces of information, we can make
the dough any size we want.

Related: A simple solution to your pizza dough bubble troubles

Here’s how that works: If you know how much dough you want to make, just find
the sum of the bakers percent comprising your dough formula, then divide this by
100 (moving the decimal point two places to the left) and divide the desired dough
weight by this number. The result will be the flour weight needed to make the
desired new dough weight. With the new flour weight, we can then use our bakers
percent calculations to find the new ingredient weights.

With bakers percent, the total flour weight is always equal to 100%. The rest of the
ingredient percentages and weights are based on the flour weight.

Using your calculator, enter the flour weight and press “X,” then enter the ingredient
percentage you want the weight for and press the “%” key. Read the ingredient
weight in the display window, taking into account that the ingredient weight will be
shown in the same weight measure (pounds, ounces, grams, kilograms, etc.) that the
flour weight was shown in.
Here’s an example: The flour weight is 40 pounds, which is equal to 100%, and the
oil amount is shown as 1.5%. Type in 40 X 1.5, then press the “%” key, and 0.6
pounds is the result. If you want to change your ingredient weights to ounces, just
show the flour weight in ounces (40 X 16 = 640 ounces). Do the same math, 640 X
1.5, then press the “%” key, resulting in 9.6 ounces. Do this for each ingredient
percentage, and you will have a dough with correct ingredient weights.

When we want to change the dough size by manipulating the amount of flour used,
here’s the procedure: Let’s say we are presently using 40 pounds of flour in our
dough and we want to increase our dough size based on the addition of 10 more
pounds of flour weight. This will bring our total flour weight to 50 pounds for our
new dough. All we need to do now is to put 50 pounds down as the flour weight,
and then multiply by 50 X ingredient percentage (press the “%” key). When this has
been done for each ingredient weight, you will have your new dough with all
ingredient weights correct for 50 pounds of flour weight.

If your dough is not already shown in bakers percent, it’s easy to convert your
dough formula to that. The first thing you need to do is to show all ingredient
amounts in weight measures (cups, tablespoons, scoops, etc. will not work). Then
divide the weight of each ingredient by the weight of the flour and multiply by 100.

Here’s an example: Flour weight = 50 pounds, salt weight = 1 pound. Remember
that both the flour and ingredient weights must be in the same weight units
(pounds, ounces, grams, kilograms, etc.). Therefore, 1 divided by 50 X 100 = 2%. Do
this for each ingredient, and you will have your dough formula shown in bakers
percent.

When changing most dough weights into bakers percent, I find it easier to
automatically show the flour weight in ounces. This is because most of the smaller
ingredient amounts will be in ounces, so in keeping flour and ingredient weights in
the same units, just change the flour weight into ounces to keep the math easy. In
this case, 50 pounds = 800 ounces (50 X 16 = 800). Divide the salt weight, 16
ounces, by 800, and multiply by 100, which equals 2%.

If math intimidates you, there are some very good Excel spreadsheets that will do
the math for you. To use these, all you will need to do is to fill in the blank spaces
with the correct information.

Bakers percent is a great tool, as it allows us to immediately see any discrepancies in
the dough formulation by turning it into a mathematical equation. This lets us
manipulate the size of the dough up or down, keeping the dough in correct balance,
so a dough based on 50 pounds of flour will consistently perform the same as it did
when based on 40 pounds of flour weight.

A few things to keep in mind when working in bakers percent: “Total” flour is always
expressed as 100%, but this is for wheat flours only. A dough might contain
different types of wheat flour, such as regular white flour, whole-wheat flour or
semolina flour. In this case, the sum of the percent of each flour must equal 100%,
while the individual percentages will each be something less than 100%.

Here’s an example: A dough formula based on 50 pounds of total flour weight
contains 30 pounds of white flour (regular pizza flour), 15 pounds of whole-wheat
flour, and 5 pounds of semolina flour. The bakers’ percent shown for each are as
follows: white flour, 30 divided by 50 X 100 = 60%; whole-wheat flour, 15 divided
by 50 X 100 = 30%; semolina flour, 5 divided by 50 X 100 = 10%. The sum of the
percentages equals 100% (60 + 30 + 10 = 100). This is how we show the amounts
of different wheat flours when we have a dough formula presented in bakers
percent.

The late Tom Lehmann was a longtime contributor to PMQ, a renowned industry
consultant and the former director of bakery assistance for the American Institute of
Baking (AIB). This article was originally published in PMQ Pizza’s November 2018
issue.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
