How do I calculate the cost of my dough?
   pmq.com/how-do-i-calculate-the-cost-of-my-dough

Blake Harris                                                              November 1, 2005


Question:

How do I calculate the cost of my dough?

Answer:

Many of us have spread sheets that will automatically calculate our dough cost for
us, but many of the small operators don't have that nifty tool available to work with,
so they must revert to the old, tried and true method of long hand dough cost
calculations.

Here is how I've always done it. Set-up the table below on a clean sheet of paper
and run off some copies:

Now, if you want to figure out what it costs to make your dough, including such
things as labor, overhead, etc. use the rule of 2.5 times the unit dough cost to get a
realistic picture of what it is actually costing you to make the dough, in this case it
would be 2.5 X 7.8 cents = $0.195 (19.5 cents) per dough piece.

In working with this table it is important to remember to show the ingredient
amounts in pounds as a decimal. To do this, divide the ingredient weight in ounces
by 16. If an ingredient amount is say, 3 pounds and 7 ounces, the decimal amount
will be 3.438 pounds (rounded from 3.4375 pounds).
The ingredient unit cost is the ingredient cost per pound. If, for example, you
purchase a 50-pound bag of sugar for $19 (delivered to your door), the unit cost
will be $0.38 (38 cents) per pound.

For the water cost, take your average water bill and see how much water you're
using. It may be reported either in cubic feet (62.43 pounds of water per cubic foot,
or in gallons (7.963 pounds per gallon). Not all of that water is being used in making
your dough, but since a good part of it is either going into the dough or used in
cleaning dough related equipment, pots and pans/dinnerware the dough is an
appropriate place to charge it against. Hey, somebody has to pay for it.

You can follow the same outline for calculating the cost of your sauce or anything
else with multiple ingredients.
This is the way we used to do it way back when – well lets just say before the day of
the hand held calculator or computer with all of its labor saving programs.

Question:

I'm trying to make a special Chicago-style pizza crust and I'm having a problem
getting the crust the right color. I've added eggs and corn flour, but I still can't get
the yellow, almost orange color I'm looking for.

Answer:

The color you are looking for is not the result of eggs or corn flour, but rather the
result of adding egg-shade (AKA egg coloring) to the dough.

Question:

I'm new to the pizza business and I'm now looking at vertical and spiral type mixers.
There are so many to choose from. With all the different speeds these mixers have,
what is the correct speed to mix the dough on?

Answer:

First let's discuss a little bit about the mixing of a pizza dough. Pizza doughs are best
under-mixed to some extent. That is, it is really not desirable to fully develop the
protein in the flour into gluten. If this is done, the resulting dough can become
excessively tough and elastic, making it difficult to shape due to the snap-back or
memory properties of the dough. Typically, pizza dough is mixed just to the point of
developing a smooth dough appearance. There will be a significant amount of
further gluten development in the dough, but this will come about as a result of bio-
chemical gluten development, during the fermentation period of the dough (several
hours at room temperature or 18 to 72 hours in the cooler). When the gluten is
developed in this manner, the dough has a very relaxed feel and is easy to form
without excessive snap-back or memory.

To achieve the proper mixing of the dough, we have found that, using a 2-speed,
vertical mixer, it is best to use low (1st.) speed to blend the ingredients together,
then switch to 2nd speed for the rest of the mixing. When using a 3-speed mixer, the
mixing sequence might be a little different. Use low speed to blend the ingredients
together. This helps to prevent ingredients from becoming air-borne when you
change up to the next higher speed. Continue mixing at low speed until the dough
just begins to take on a smooth, satiny appearance. Now, change to 2nd speed to
mix the dough for a minute or so to finish it. With a 4-speed mixer, you should again
use 1st speed to blend the ingredients together, then go to 2nd speed for the bulk of
the dough mixing. I don't ever remember using 3rd or 4th speed on a 3 or 4-speed
mixer to develop a dough. If you do, you will probably be rudely reminded by the
mixer that this is not something that it likes to do. First, it will stall, or slow down in
speed, then if you still haven't gotten the clue, it will begin to overheat and trip out
the thermal overload switch in the motor. Once this happens, grab yourself a cup of
coffee and take a break, it will be several minutes before the motor cools down and
the overloads are automatically reset. Until then, you're without a mixer. If you insist
on this course of mixer abuse, you will soon notice that your mixer's thermal
overloads are tripping out sooner, and more frequently. Hello, Mr. Mixer Repair
Man, I've got this problem with my mixer.

Keep in mind that these are only guidelines for mixing a pizza dough, the exact
make and model of mixer that you have, the age of it, its overall mechanical
condition, and the formulation of your dough will dictate the best speeds to mix
your dough. Remember to always begin mixing at low speed to blend and wet the
ingredients as this will reduce/prevent splashing of ingredients, then go to the next
higher speed only if your mixer will handle the load without overheating or stalling,
and mix the dough just until it takes on a smooth, satiny appearance, any more
mixing than that will only make life more difficult for both you and your mixer.

Got more dough questions? Be sure to check out The Dough Doctor's New York
Pizza Show Dough Seminar.

Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
