How to Achieve the Perfect Dough Mix
   pmq.com/how-to-achieve-the-perfect-dough-mix

webpublisherprobd                                                         October 13, 2021


     To make sure your dough has been properly mixed, use the dough’s
     appearance as a guide.
     There are exceptions, though, for emergency dough and frozen dough.

Related: Try this recipe for a Crispy Pepperoni and Egg Breakfast Pizza

Question: How do I know when my dough has been properly mixed?

Answer: The easiest way is to use the dough’s appearance as a guide. At first, it will
have a rough, dull, almost dark appearance; as you continue mixing, it takes on a
smoother look, and the color seems to brighten. Actually, the color remains the
same but, due to the smoother surface, it now reflects light, giving it a brighter hue.
Once this smoothness has been achieved, you’ll also note a satiny appearance,
which means the dough has been sufficiently mixed.

However, there are two exceptions. If you’re making an emergency dough—which
will not be subjected to 18-plus hours of cold fermentation time and will be used
shortly after mixing —more mechanical gluten development will be required. It
depends on your particular formula, but, as a general rule, emergency dough should
be mixed for about five minutes longer than regular dough.

The second exception is for frozen dough. It will receive essentially no fermentation
prior to being frozen, so it’s important to develop the gluten to a much greater
extent than that which would be required for regular pizza dough. Frozen pizza
dough typically uses strong, high- protein flour, helping the dough to resist the
abuse it receives during storage and the freeze/thaw process.

Use the “window test” for frozen dough: Carefully stretch a small portion of the
dough in your fingers to form a sheet or a “window”; the clearer the window, the
more developed the gluten is. Fully developed gluten lets you stretch the dough to
form a window that is so fine and clear that you can just about read a newspaper
through it.

Note, however, that the “window test” is not good for judging regular pizza dough,
which is significantly undermixed when you’re doing it right; the dough will
probably just tear. It’s best for judging dough/gluten development with frozen
dough or bread dough.
Before he passed in December 2020, Tom Lehmann was a longtime contributor
PMQ Pizza Magazine and served as the director of bakery assistance for the
American Institute of Baking. This article originally appeared in the June-July 2016
issue of PMQ.

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
