Making Good Use of Scrap Pizza Dough
   pmq.com/leftover-pizza-dough

Blake Harris                                                                  March 1, 2015


      You can add scrap dough to your fresh dough at no more than 15% of
      the new dough weight.
      You can also use leftover dough to make side items like breadsticks and
      garlic knots.

Q: What is the best way to handle leftover pizza dough?​

A: To prevent food waste, you can incorporate scrap dough into your fresh dough at
a rate not to exceed 15% of the new dough weight. Just cut the scrap dough into
pieces and add it to the dough mixer about halfway through the normal mixing
procedure. Just make sure the added dough doesn’t push your mixer beyond its
mixing capacity. If in doubt, try this: Mix your regular dough in the usual way, then
add the scrap dough about three minutes before the mixing process is complete. Put
the mixer on low speed and continue mixing for another five minutes to incorporate
the scrap dough.

There are additional ways to put your scrap dough to use. You can use it to make
side items such as breadsticks or garlic knots. Start by scaling your scrap dough into
2-oz. pieces. Form each piece into a ball, then place the balls on a lightly floured
sheet pan. Cover the pan with plastic to prevent drying and set aside to proof/relax
for about an hour or until the dough balls can be easily rolled under your hands on
a bench top. At this point, you should be able to roll the balls into strips (or strings)
of dough about 6” to 8” long.

To make breadsticks, place the dough strings on a lightly oiled pan and set aside
again to proof/rise for about 40 minutes. Then bake them lightly, just until they
begin to develop some color. Remove them from the oven and let them cool on the
pan. Once they’ve cooled off, the breadsticks can be stored in any suitable container
at room temperature for up to three days.

To finish the breadsticks later, place them onto a screen or tray and pass it quickly
through the oven, just long enough to thoroughly warm the breadsticks. Brush them
with melted butter and finish with a sprinkling of a powdered Parmesan-Romano
cheese blend with a little dried oregano, basil and garlic salt.
Making garlic knots is just as easy. Form a simple overhand knot with the dough
strings immediately after they’re formed. Proof for 40 minutes and bake until they
just begin to show crust color. Brush them liberally with a 50-50 blend of butter and
olive oil and a generous amount of diced garlic. Finish with a light sprinkle of
powdered Parmesan cheese and serve hot!

Dough Information Center, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
