The Secrets to Creating a Better Crumb Structure
for Your Pizza Crust
   pmq.com/create-a-better-crumb-structure

Rick Hynum                                                                    March 23, 2022


When we hear a true pizza aficionado describing a really great pizza, it’s seldom the
cheese or the sauce or even the toppings they refer to. It’s the textural properties of
the crust, whether light and tender, crispy or chewy. So what’s the secret behind
these important characteristics?

You might think it’s the flour, the fermentation time, the dough mixing time, the
dough absorption rate, the yeast level, or simply how the pizza is baked. And you
wouldn’t necessarily be wrong—all of these factors impact the textural properties of
the finished crust. But the one common denominator associated with all of them is
their effect upon the cell structure, or crumb structure, of the crust. And that, in turn,
has the greatest impact on the textural and chewable properties of the pizza.

What most of us—including our customers—are looking for is that nice, open,
porous (some call it “airy”) cell structure in the finished pizza. It’s probably a little
more complicated than you might like (because, you know…science), but here’s how
it works.




Drilling Down to the Cellular Level
To begin, we have to understand how the cells are formed and how each of our
ingredients affects the cell structure. The cell structure of the dough is created
during the mixing process, in which each cell’s nucleus is formed by incorporating
air into the dough. These nuclei expand further into the cell structure through the
action of leavening gas created by the yeast and through heating and expansion of
those gases. Water is also vaporized during the baking process, further expanding
the cells.

How does all of this impact the textural properties of the crust? Since pizzas are
baked from the bottom up, a more open (larger) cell structure creates a better
thermal break between the bottom of the crust and the moisture-laden sauce and
toppings. This means that the crust will brown more rapidly and exhibit better bake-
out (moisture loss) during baking, resulting in a crispier crust—and will retain its
crispiness for a longer time after baking.
With a smaller cell structure, the thermal break is less efficient, allowing heat to pass
through the denser dough. There, it’s dissipated as steam from the moisture in the
sauce and toppings. In this case, the crust will be slower to brown, and it will not
lose as much moisture during baking. In fact, it might even collapse as the pizza is
removed from the oven, resulting in a dense crust with tough or excessively chewy
eating properties.

So that’s what’s happening at the cellular level. To get a better idea of how your
dough ingredients affect cell structure formation, we need to look at each ingredient
separately.

Flour and Protein Content
The higher the protein content of the flour, the stronger the flour usually is, as
evidenced by the excessive dough memory or snap-back it can contribute to the
dough. This is referred to as dough elasticity. As dough elasticity increases, the
resistance to expansion of the cell structure also increases. So if we change to a
higher protein/stronger flour, we could very well experience a loss in that all-
important cell structure or, at least, a smaller cell structure, thus reducing the
thermal break. The result is a loss of crispiness, and that’s probably not good.

So how do we achieve a crispier crust with a higher protein flour? Typically, the
higher the protein content, the higher the dough absorption will be. So the answer is
simple: Just make sure to satisfy the absorption requirements of the higher protein
flour, which will restore some of the dough’s extensibility and allow it to expand
more readily.

You could use a lower protein flour, of course, but higher protein has a big
advantage: It allows you to ferment the dough for a longer time while retaining
dough strength. The increased fermentation time has a mellowing
(softening/weakening) effect upon the gluten-forming proteins in the flour, which
provides for greater dough extensibility while also allowing for the formation and
capture of more of the desirable leavening gases created during fermentation.

It’s important to note that this is a slow process, so the cells are expanded gradually,
resulting in larger individual cells. And that’s what many of us look for in our
finished crusts!
Water and Vapor
As the water/dough absorption is increased, the dough becomes more fluid, softer
and more extensible, all of which contribute to a larger crumb structure.
Additionally, a portion of the water is converted to vapor and steam, which combine
with the leavening gas to open the cell nuclei into a larger crumb structure. But be
careful here: Too much water will make the dough too soft and fluid, leading to
excessive or rapid expansion of the cell structure during baking. In this case, the
dough may collapse, destroying the crumb structure—and your vision of a nice,
crispy pizza.

Yeast and Fermentation Time
The yeast level is responsible for both the softening of the gluten structure through
fermentation and for producing the leavening gas (carbon dioxide), which helps to
open the nuclei into the larger cell structure we want to achieve. To an extent, the
more yeast that is added to the dough, the more prevalent and larger the cell
structure will be. However, with sufficient fermentation time for the yeast to produce
carbon dioxide, even very small amounts of yeast will produce more than enough
leavening power to produce a very open and porous cell structure.

Salt and Gluten Structure
While we usually think of salt as a flavoring ingredient, it’s also largely responsible
for regulating the rate of fermentation and strengthening/toughening the gluten
structure of the dough. But too much salt can slow the fermentation rate, so the
necessary effects of fermentation (dough extensibility and production of carbon
dioxide) may not be achieved. In this case, the gluten structure will be further
toughened, increasing elasticity, which in turn inhibits cell expansion within the
crumb structure.

Fortunately, this problem can be addressed to a great extent by adding more yeast
to compensate for the higher salt level.

Oil and Shortening
Added fat also plays an important role in cell structure development and expansion.
It both lubricates the dough for ease of expansion and coats the individual cell walls,
which helps them better retain leavening gas and water vapor. This may allow them
to expand to a greater size without bursting or coalescing into fewer but larger cells.
In some instances, however, this coalescing of cells produces the crumb structure
we’re looking for, which explains why some dough formulations don’t use fat/oil at
all. As long as the coalescing is not too severe, the cell structure will retain sufficient
strength to support the weight of the toppings and still provide the necessary
thermal break that makes a crispier crust.

Sugar and Yeast Activity
Finally, let’s take a quick look at sugar. This ingredient will influence the way the
crust bakes, which can impact crispiness, but it has no direct impact on the cell
structure of the crust. Even so, in some cases, the sugar will provide a nutrient for
the yeast to feed upon, which in turn will help to ensure good yeast activity during
long fermentation periods. And good yeast activity, as we said before, makes for
better cell structure!

The late Tom “The Dough Doctor” Lehmann was a pizza industry expert and
consultant on dough matters. This article originally appeared in the January-
February 2018 issue of PMQ Pizza Magazine.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
