Tired of cross-stacking your dough boxes? Tom
“The Dough Doctor” Lehmann has an alternative
you might like better.
    pmq.com/tired-of-cross-stacking-your-dough-boxes-tom-the-dough-doctor-lehmann-has-an-
alternative-you-might-like-better

webpublisherprobd                                                                    August 1, 2017


Q Why do I need to cross-stack boxes of dough balls in the cooler? Coming
back later to down-stack the boxes is a real pain.

Cross-stacking the dough boxes allows the dough balls to cool down at a consistent,
uniform rate. If the dough boxes are not cross-stacked, the heat in the dough will
allow moisture trapped in the box to condense on the colder box surfaces, where it
will drip onto the dough. These water-spotted dough balls can exhibit sticky
handling properties and a strong tendency to bubble during baking. Even worse, if
the dough balls don’t cool down uniformly, the amount of fermentation the dough
receives during the next 24 to 72 hours (or more) will strongly depend on the
finished dough temperature; a difference of only two degrees can have a significant
impact on dough quality and performance. The length of time the dough boxes
remain cross-stacked is also important, as any variation can result in changes in
dough performance, especially after several days of storage in the cooler.

If you have difficulty fitting the cross-stack and down-stack times into your
schedule, there’s another option. Lightly oil the dough balls and place them in
individual plastic bags immediately after balling; the open end of the bag should be
twisted into a ponytail and tucked under the dough ball. Now the dough, placed on
a metal sheet pan or into a conventional dough box, can go straight into the cooler
without any additional covering. If you use dough boxes, simply cross-stack them
and go home. When you return the next morning, you can down-stack them for
long-term storage.

This alternative method works well because the bag is pulled firmly around the
dough ball for full contact; the bag offers little insulation, so the dough cools at a
predictable rate. The bag also prevents the dough balls from drying out during a
longer-than-normal cross-stack period. But note that it’s important to tuck the
twisted ponytail under the dough ball; this allows for some expansion of the dough
ball without bursting the bag. For those of you with reach-in coolers, this is also the
best way to manage your dough balls, as cross-stacking is impossible, and offset
stacking is only marginally effective.
Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In Lehmann's Terms
