Why Does My Pizza Keep Sticking to the Peel?
   pmq.com/why-does-my-pizza-keep-sticking-to-the-peel

Rick Hynum                                                                      May 2, 2024


Nothing is worse than peeling a dressed pizza skin into the oven and pulling out a
half-dressed pie still clinging to the peel—except when it happens at 7 o’clock on a
Saturday night. Fortunately, there are a few things that can be done to reduce
the possibility of the dough sticking to the peel.

First, make sure you’re using the correct peel. Pizza peels come in two styles: metal
and wood/composite. The wood/composite peel is the correct peel to use as a prep
peel. The metal peel should be relegated to the oven as an oven peel only. The
wood/composite peels are much less likely to cause condensation to form on the
peel due to temperature differences between the peel and the dough. This
condensation can cause the dough to adhere to the peel.

The next thing to consider: What are you using for a peel dust? While plain flour
works well, it isn’t very forgiving. If the dough is a little cold or sticky, for whatever
reason, you must be on top of your dough dressing game, or you might end up with
the dough sticking to the peel at the oven’s entrance. Some operators swear by
cornmeal as a release material on the peel; it works great, much like thousands of
tiny ball bearings under the dough skin. With just a little shake, the dressed
dough will slide effortlessly off the peel.

Related: How to achieve the perfect pizza crust edge

The only problem with cornmeal has to do with the grit that it can impart to
the bottom of the baked pizza. For some, this is desirable; for others, it is not. Then,
too, the excess cornmeal has to be regularly swept out of the oven, or it will show up
on the bottoms of the baked pizzas as hard black spots.

Some operators use semolina flour instead of cornmeal. Semolina flour
is significantly coarser than regular flour, and it doesn’t absorb moisture as quickly
as regular flour does. For this reason, it makes for a pretty decent peel dust—a good
compromise between regular flour and cornmeal.

Still other operators have turned to more “exotic” ingredients to use as a peel dust,
such as wheat bran, rice flour, corn flour, coarse-ground whole-wheat flour, and
even rye flour. Any of these materials make for an effective peel dust. My own
personal favorite peel dust is a blend of equal parts of cornmeal, semolina flour
and regular pizza flour. Don’t ask me why I like it—it just works for me. It gives me
the confidence necessary to peel the dressed dough into the oven with authority
and confidence, knowing that the dough will slide off the peel every time.

Finally, here’s a little trick to keep from dumping your pizza toppings onto a
hot deck while the dough remains firmly affixed to the peel: As you’re taking the
dressed dough skin to the oven, give it a little shake to confirm that the dough is not
sticking to the peel. If it is, there is no reason to believe that it will miraculously free
itself as you peel it into the oven! Now is your chance to address the problem by
freeing the dough from the peel or, at worst, dumping the pizza and starting over
again. This sure beats transferring the mess to your oven stones, where it
will continue to plague you until you clean it off, not to mention the smoke
and aroma of burning toppings emanating from your oven.

The late Tom Lehmann was the director of bakery assistance for the American
Institute of Baking (AIB), a leading pizza industry consultant and a frequent
contributor to PMQ.

Dough Information Center, Food & Ingredients, Tom Lehmann, Tom Lehmann: In
Lehmann's Terms
