MODERNIST
PIZZA
Techniques and Ingredients
MODERNIST
PIZZA
Volume 2
Techniques and Ingredients
MODERNIST
PIZZA
Nathan Myhrvold
Francisco Migoya
Photography by Nathan Myhrvold
and The Cooking Lab Photography Team
The Cooking Lab
Volume 1 Volume 2
FOREWORD BY TONY GEMIGNANI
FOREWORD BY ENZO COCCIA
vi TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
vii CHAPTER 6: MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
3
OUR CULINARY JOURNEYS BY NATHAN MYHRVOLD viii Naming the Parts of a Pizza
4
BY
 FRANCISCO MIGOYA The Quality Characteristics of Pizza
8
THE STORY OF THIS BOOK xi Planning to Make Pizza 15
ABOUT THE RECIPES XX Mixing 23
Bulk Fermentation 48 HISTORY AND FUNDAMENTALS Dividing and Preshaping 52 CHAPTER 1: HISTORY OF PIZZA 3
Final Proofing 65
What Is Pizza?
4
Searching for the Origins of Pizza
6 CHAPTER 7: PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 81
The City That Created Pizza 12 Pizza Styles 82
Pizza Arrives in America 25 Our Variations 100
Pizza in Argentina 40 Thin-Crust Pizza Dough 110
Pizza in Brazil 43 Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough 114
Industrial America and New Haven 48 Deep-Dish Pizza Dough 118
Pizza Marches Across the United States 53 Neapolitan Pizza Dough 124
Back in the Old Country: 20th-Century Naples
Pizza in Postwar America
67 New York Pizza Dough 132
77 Artisan Pizza Dough 142
Pizza in Italy Today 86 Focaccia Dough 148
New York Square Pizza Dough 152
CHAPTER 2: WORLD OF PIZZA 91 High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough 158
Our Pizza Mission
What Constitutes a Style?
Quality Transcends Style
But That's What I Grew Up On!
The Close Associates of Pizza
92 Detroit-Style Pizza Dough 166
94 Our Variation Recipes 172
113
115 CHAPTER 8: SAUCE 203
123 Why We Put Sauce on Pizza 204
Pizza Styles 125 Applying Sauce 205
Tomato Sauces 210
CHAPTER 3: TRAVEL 149 Thickening Sauces 242
Choosing the Pizzerias 150 Dairy-Based Sauces 250
Naples and Campania 154 Emulsion-Based Sauces 259
Rome 168 Stocks, Soups, and Pasta Sauces as Pizza Sauce 268
Northern Italy 179 Vegetable- and Fruit-Based Sauces 278
São Paulo
Buenos Aires
Tokyo
New York
New Haven
Chicago
190
200 CHAPTER 9: CHEESE 285
208 Milk 286
214 Cheese Making 290
228 Preparing Your Cheese 296
234
Quad Cities 248
Applying Cheese to Your Pizza
Mozzarella
303
315
Old Forge 249 Ricotta 338
Detroit 250 CHAPTER 10: TOPPINGS 343
Portland, Oregon 254 The
 Science of Pizza Toppings 344
Rest of the United States 262 Topping Payload 346
CHAPTER 4: PIZZA DOUGH INGREDIENTS 271 Topping Application 349
Flour 273 Fruits and Vegetables 356
Water 288 Precooking Techniques 360
Yeast 292 Meats 375
Preferments 298 Finishing Your Pizza 382
Salt 313 CHAPTER 11: BAKING PIZZA 387
Sugar 315
Fats and Oils 316
Improving Pizza Dough 322
Transferring Your Dough
Transforming Dough into Pizza
Pizza Baking Methods
388
392
395
Inclusions 331 INDEX 423
CHAPTER 5: OVENS 345
The Physics of Baking
The Physics of Dough and Sauce
The Gel Layer Problem
Selecting a Pizza Oven
346
362
370
375
INDEX 396
Volume 3
RECIPES
CHAPTER 12: ICONIC RECIPES
Our Iconic Pizzas
Thin-Crust Pizza
Neapolitan Pizza
Medium-Crust Pizza
Deep-Dish Pizza
3
4
10
34
60
86
Thick-Crust Pizza 106
Prebaked Pizza 130
Pizza Cousins 156
CHAPTER 13: FLAVOR THEMES 173
Our Favorite Flavor Combinations 174
CHAPTER 14: SERVING AND STORAGE 293
When to Serve Pizza 294
Serving Pizza 298
Holding Pizza Hot 305
Reheating Pizza 312
Storing Leftover Pizza 328
FURTHER READING 335
PHOTOGRAPHY AND ILLUSTRATION CREDITS 338
GLOSSARY 339
GRAIN COOKING HOW-TOS 342
REFERENCE TABLES 350
RESOURCES 377
CONTRIBUTORS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 386
INDEX 389
CHAPTER 6
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
NAMING THE PARTS OF A PIZZA 4
THE QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS OF PIZZA 8
PLANNING TO MAKE PIZZA 15
MIXING 23
BULK FERMENTATION 48
DIVIDING AND PRESHAPING 52
FINAL PROOFING 65
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Most pizza doughs are made more or less the same
way, but pizza's diversity shines in the final outcomes, ranging from ultra-thin, crisp, and crackerlike to something that is almost as thick as a piece
of bread. The differences between pizza styles are
created in the details. A slight change in the proportion of ingredients, or in the duration ofthe mixing,
proofing, or shaping, will produce different results.
Environmental conditions, storage practices, and
equipment can play a role, too. The combination of
all those small details will produce the characteristics
of a specific style of pizza.
Our pizza doughs fall into three categories: thin
crust (which includes our master recipes for thincrust, Brazilian thin-crust, and deep-dish pizzas),
medium crust (Neapolitan, New York, and artisan
pizzas), and bread-like crust (focaccia; New York
square, al taglio, and Detroit-style pizzas). Traditionally, each of these pizzas have had a different kind of
dough, but we cross-tested making each pizza style
with the other master doughs, and it turns out that
one dough can work for many styles of pizza (see
page 96).
Regardless of the dough's thickness, one ofthe
most important attributes of any pizza is its crust,
whether it's the outermost charred rim of a Neapolitan pizza (known as the cornicione) or the crispy
cheese-edged corner of a Detroit-style pizza (known
as frico). Toppings and sauce affect the crust, too,
because they help determine how the pizza will bake
and how the dough expands in the oven.
As with anything, it takes practice to become
proficient in making pizza dough. Some styles, such
as our thin-crust pizza, are easier to master; others,
like Neapolitan, require a lot of practice and also
some special equipment. We met many pizzaioli
who told us that they're still honing their craft, even
after decades. This seemed unlikely to us as we
watched their beautiful pizzas come out of the oven
one after another, but for them, perfecting pizza is a
lifelong endeavor.
In this chapter, we'll elaborate on some ofthe
most critical aspects of making pizza dough: mixing,
dividing the dough into pizza-sized portions,
preshaping, and proofing. We'll cover the specifics
of shaping and baking in the Iconic Recipes chapter
on page 3:3 since they vary by pizza style. Don't
worry if your earliest attempts aren't perfectly round
(or square or rectangular, or whatever shape you're
going for). In the end, each pizza is a learning experience that will make you a better pizza maker. No
matter how it turns out, you'll still have a hot pizza to
eat, and even big mistakes can be tasty when topped
with sauce and melted cheese.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
The triangle test is the best way to evaluate your recipe (see page 9)
The kind of mixer you use doesn't matter (see page 39)
Two simple tricks can prevent black spots on your dough (see page 72)
Dough CPR can resuscitate your overproofed dough (see page 77)
Some pizzaioli swear by a particular
type of flour, saying that's the key to
their excellent crust. While it's possible that their favorite flour makes a
difference (certain flours may be more
appropriate for specific pizza styles; see
page 1:283), it's far more likely that practice and experience, not flour, are what
make their finished product excel.
Italian pizzaioli tend to be adamant
that pizza is not bread-it's its own thing
(even though naming conventions for
pizza and pizza-like items can be blurry;
see page 1:96). It's worth noting, however, that lots of fantastic pizzerias are
owned and operated by bread bakers
because they understand how to make
crusts that people want to eat. You can
look at pizza as a very specialized kind
of bread (due to the shaping techniques, thickness and toppings) that
takes you in a very different direction.
БАЗА ПРЕМИУ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
3
6
A Great Dane and a Chihuahua are both
dogs, albeit different breeds with completely
different characteristics and sizes. Pizza styles
are similar-they all fall under the umbrella of
"pizza" but can vary widely in size, texture of
the crust, and appearance.
NAMING THE PARTS OF A PIZZA
All of our pizza doughs contain at least four
ingredients: flour, water, salt, and yeast (some also
include fat or other less significant ingredients like
diastatic malt powder, malt powder, or malt syrup).
By adjusting the proportion of ingredients and how
they're mixed, fermented, and baked, we can achieve
different results that vary in crust and crumb. A
thin-crust pizza will have a look, flavor, and texture
that's very different from an al taglio pizza, yet they
are undoubtedly both pizza. Pizza styles are a bit
like dog breeds. A Great Dane and a Chihuahua are
both in the same genus, Canis, even though there are
substantial differences in their size, head shape, and
fur length.
A perfect pizza crust can be crisp on the surface
and yield to a soft, chewy interior. Or it can be thin
and almost cracker-like, depending on the style.
Sometimes, the outer rim of the pizza crust is
what people leave behind. These uneaten pieces
are known as pizza bones. Ifthe crust is good
enough, though, you won't find as many bones
left on the plate.
We believe that eating this part of the pizza is the
best way to experience the true expression ofthe
baked dough, since the flavor of the crust doesn't
have sauce, cheese, or anything else to compete with.
This is especially true ifyou used a levain-raised
recipe; it would be hard to taste the distinctive tang
of sourdough, and to appreciate all the work that
went into building and maintaining the levain, if you
ate it only when it was covered in sauce and cheese.
But there's more to pizza crust thanjust the rim.
Actually, we spent some time thinking through what
seems to be a simple question: What, exactly, are
pizza crust and crumb?
The Difference between the
Rim and Under Crust
To a bread baker, the crust is the outside layer of the
bread and the center is the crumb (the latter term
is used less often, but it's the technical term). When
it comes to pizza, the term "crust" is used to mean
the entire base of the baked pizza. That's not very
helpful to us, which is why we're clarifying the terms
that we are using.
Rim
Crumb
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Bottom
We call the outer crust the rim (or cornicione).
The rim isn't weighed down with sauce or cheese,
which allows it to expand and brown in the oven.
(Some professional pizza makers consider the
shaping and crumb structure of the cornicione to be
indicative of the skill and talent of the pizza maker.)
The width of the rim is determined by how far
you spread the sauce and cheese, and the thickness
by how you shape the pizza (and the steam that
forms while it bakes). When you intentionally press
down on the entirety of the dough with your hands
or a rolling pin, you'll have a lower-volume rim than
if you handle it minimally.
The under crust is what supports all the sauce,
cheese, and toppings. In general, the longer a pizza
bakes, the crispier the under crust will be. A crispier
under crust won't sag when you pick it up; instead,
it's able to hold what we call a plank. How a pizza
is baked, how thick it is, the order of topping placement, and how many ingredients you put on top also
play a role in whether a slice will sag or hold a plank
(see page 6).
When we say crumb, we mean the center of the
rim and the center of the under crust in pan-baked
pizzas. On, say, a New York pizza, there's a clear
differentiation between the rim, crumb, and under
crust. The key difference between the rim and the
rest of the crust is the rim is generally unsauced (see
page 3:71). If you sauce a pizza all the way to the
edge, then it won't have a rim. This is a characteristic
of some styles (see page 4). This taxonomy only
works for relatively thin floor-baked pizzas. Pizzas
baked in a pan can be baked in a pan with sauce and
toppings covering the entire top (such as New York
square and Detroit-style) or it can be baked without
a topping or without much topping or sauce (such
as al taglio). Either way,it won't have a pronounced
rim. Deep-dish is in contact with the sauce and
toppings, so there is not as much of a rim. Typically,
the sauce covers the dough almost entirely, with just
a thin border left uncovered. The rim bakes to the
same height as the rest of the pizza.
The bottom of the pizza (or the bottom of the
crust) means the same thing for all styles of pizzas,
but the bottom of a Neapolitan pizza will look very
different than a Detroit-style pizza. Some pizzas
have special features, like Detroit-style, which has
cheese baked around the crust, or Chicago double
crust, which has two crusts, like a pie. We cover the
finer points of making these pizza doughs in this
chapter and discuss sauces on page 203, cheese on
page 285, and toppings on page 343.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 5
6
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Some pizzas, like a Neapolitan slice (top), have a natural tendency to droop at the end (what we call tip sag). Others, like the
artisan (middle) and thin-crust (bottom) pizzas, are sturdier and
can hold a plank when folded.
6
Rim CRUMВ
The holy grail for some pizza makers is to obtain a
huge open-crumb structure. Pizza makers love to
use social media to show off examples of big uneven
alveoli in the rim or even in the under crust of
thicker pizzas. But this doesn't apply to every kind
of pizza, and the crumb structure will vary based on
the pizza style. Thicker high-hydration doughs, like
al taglio pizzas, have more open crumb structuresthis is one of the reasons we call these pizzas breadlike. Thin-crust pizzas don't have much of a crumb
structure to speak of. This doesn't make thin-crust
pizzas inferior to open-crumb crusts; they're just
different. And an open crumb does not always mean
a better pizza.
Thin-Crust Pizzas
Several factors contribute to the interior texture of a
thin-crust pizza. Most thin-crust pizzas are generally
lower in hydration than other styles. Less water in
the dough means less steam to inflate bubbles during
baking (see page 392). What matters most is how the
dough is extended. Making the dough thin, either by
sheeting the dough mechanically or rolling it out by
hand with a rolling pin, will often produce a small or
tight crumb structure. These flattening methods force
most of the fermentation bubbles to pop; it's different
from gently pulling on a dough and then stippling (or
dimpling) it, which coalesces the bubbles and forms
nucleation points for them to expand rather than
collapse. Thin-crust doughs may also contain oil, or
other fat, which adds flavor and makes them a little
softer and easier to roll out. The oil contributes to a
shorter texture in the crumb as well.
Other Pizzas
Hydration can be a factor in creating an open-crumb
texture, but it isn't always. Some thicker-crust pizzas
in this book (Detroit-style and New York square)
are not dramatically higher in hydration than those
with thin crusts. They can actually be even lower in
hydration and still have a dramatically larger crumb.
The main difference is how they're shaped. Artisan
and New York pizzas are flattened at the center, but
the outer rim is left untouched or at most is minimally handled. The intent is that it will expand while
it bakes to serve as a handle of sorts to hold the
pizza while you eat it. In both these styles of pizza,
bubbles form in the rim and, to a lesser extent, in the
under crust. Pizzas that are baked in a pan are gently
stretched and stippled to coax them to fill the pan
completely without tearing the dough. The gentle
pulling, stretching, and stippling helps the bubbles
coalesce into each other to form even larger bubbles.
Rim
Thin-crust pizzas are only crust with no crumb.
Rim
Medium-crust pizzas contain crumb, bottom crust, and a rim.
Bread-like pizzas are all crust with significant interior crumb.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Some pizzaioli believe that using a
particular flour is the key to good
pizza. The AVPN (Associazione
Verace Pizza Napoletana; see page
1:74) takes that idea even further
strictly regulating the type of flour
that can be used to make "true"
Neapolitan pizza dough according to
their guidelines. Until recently, only
Tipo 00 pizza flours were permitted.
In 2019, they finally began allowing
other types. Now, AVPN-certified
pizzerias are permitted to use Tipo 0,
1, and 2 Italian flours as well.
THE QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS
OF PIZZA
Unlike most foods, pizza spans a range of styles.
Some pizzas have desired characteristics that would
be considered flaws if they were present in other
styles. A key example of this is that Neapolitan
pizza is supposed to be soft whereas New York or
artisan pizzas are supposed to be crispy. In the case
of Neapolitan, there is a whole set of rules that the
AVPN has made governing both the qualities of the
final pizza as well as every aspect of how it's made
(see page 3:43).
It's clear, however, that people enjoy multiple
types of pizzas and we don't believe in imposing a
fixed set of rules. That said, in our view, there are
certain quality characteristics that are universal that
transcend personal preference. One of those is the
presence of a gum line (see page 1:370). Under
many circumstances, the dough will not fully bake
due to the moisture content of the sauce on top and
the relatively quick baking time, so a layer of gooey
unbaked dough often lies underneath the sauce.
While it's not very noticeable in thin-crust and some
medium-crust pizzas, to us, any substantial amount
of this gel layer is a flaw.
Another quality characteristic that must be spot
on is salt. You need to strike a balance between the
salt present in the dough and how much is in the
sauce (both should be seasoned rather than having
one underseasoned and the other overly salted).
When we were gathering recipes for our database,
we observed ridiculous amounts of salt called for
(we chalked this up to the likelihood of typos). But
then we saw that the anomalies didn't stop there.
Traditionally, Neapolitan pizzaioli added more
salt to their dough in the summer because they ferment their doughs at room temperature; they want
to slow down fermentation so that the dough doesn't
overproof (see page 76). These days, there's no
reason to vary the percentage of salt in your dough
because you can proof in a refrigerator.We've also
experienced both pizzerias that serve undersalted
dough as well as entire styles that were undersalted
(see page 1:113).
Another quality characteristic to consider is the
doneness of the pizza. We were frequently served
underbaked and overbaked pizzas during our travels.
We also found many people who say that they prefer
overbaked pizzas. Although we don't believe that
we should tell them what they should like, the bitter
taste of a burnt crust or topping is unpleasant to us.
We've even seen food "experts" who will argue that
some things that we believe are flaws are correct. A
poorly baked Neapolitan pizza is wet and soupy in the
center; in Naples, and as far as we're concerned, that
would be a serious flaw. But some food writers wax
rhapsodic about how the center of a Neapolitan pizza
should have sauce and cheese that slosh.
There are many factors to consider when evaluating the quality of a pizza, from the ratio of
the rim to the center of the pizza, to the char
on the bottom crust, to bubble distribution.
We discuss the key characteristics and flaws
for each style in the Iconic Recipes chapter on
page 3:3.
8 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Many of the attributes of a pizza style come
from exaggerating some aspect of the crust
(making it super thin or thick) or the amount of
toppings (using a wide variety or loading them on
the pizza) or the amount of cheese (in our travels,
Argentinian pizzas had the most by far; see page
1:201). Each of the pizza styles have to be fairly
judged according to its characteristics. When people from the U.S. first have a traditional Neapolitan
pizza, either in Naples or in a VPN pizzeria, they
are surprised by how soft it is and think that it is a
flaw. After eating hundreds of them, we understand
the draw of the soft crust. But we also noticed that
in some pizzerias outside of Naples, but still in
Campania, we found crispy pizza.
We don't want to say you're supposed to like
something because of a specific characteristic; iť's
more nuanced than that. Maybe a pizza doesn't
have to be crispy (e.g. traditional Neapolitan pizza
in Naples) or maybe you like it a little crispy. It's
important to know what the goals of the style are,
but if you don't like it, make something else. We
provide you with delicious recipes on page 3:3, so
eat what you like.
When evaluating pizza, we use techniques
similar to those used for tasting bread, like
pulling the crust apart to inhale the aroma
of the interior crumb. One key difference is
that we have to work quickly so that the pizza
doesn't cool too much, which will impact the
eating experience and our evaluation.
6
1
HOW TO Set Up a Triangle Test
For many aspects of pizza, we try to have an objective measure in addition to the subjective flavor evaluation; for example, the volume of the
crust (see page 1:325). But even with that, many of the aspects of making
pizza have a random element. As a result, even on an objective criterion,
you cannot draw a conclusion without sampling enough pizzas to understand the statistical differences (see page 396).
Most people, especially professional chefs, have an unshaken faith
in their ability to taste accurately and to detect differences between
ingredients, but decades of research by flavor and food scientists have
shown that if we don't know the result up front, this is incredibly difficult
to do. In short, if we don't know there's a difference, we don't taste it.
You have to then ask, if you can't taste the difference, what's the point?
Conversely, if you know there's a difference, there's a tendency to taste it
even if it isn't there.
A triangle test is worth doing even if it's for
one person. But if you want a statistically
strong result, it's better to have a panel of
people-ideally 10 or more.
2 Give each tasterthree samples, two of the
same product and a third of the comparison product. If there are visual clues to the
difference, turn the lights out or blindfold
the tasters.
3 Vary the order of the samples given to each
taster to alleviate any prejudice that order
of presentation may impose. One taster
might get A A B, the next A B A, the third
BAA, and so on.
4 Have the tasters taste each sample and
score it. The goal is to see if the tasters can
detect a difference in the samples and
identify which two samples are the same.
Testers often must taste the samples several
times to determine the different one. To
avoid taster fatigue, no more than two sets
(six samples) should be evaluated in one
tasting session.
This test is designed to determine two things-first, can you tell there's
a difference? Second, if there's a difference, which do you think is better?
This seems like a really simple thing, but we believe using this method
can have a huge impact. We think it's one of the most important things
we cover in this book! To us, the key to making a great recipe is to ask
ourselves the question, what is the difference that makes a difference,
either in the ingredients or technique.
It's called a triangle test because it uses three samples, but its aim is to
determine whether there's an overall difference between two products.
The triangle consists of two samples that are identical and one that's different. We use this kind of test to determine whether a certain ingredient
or technique makes a difference in a recipe.
4
D
We kept the plates from every triangle test performed while working on this book. The resulting stack from one taster gives a
glimpse at the amount of pizzas ingested in the name of science!
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
PIZZA MAKING TOOLS
Ovens are the basic heavy-duty tools of the pizzaiolo (see page 1:375),
but a multitude of smaller pieces of equipment are enormously helpful
1) Scale: We recommend this emphatically: use a scale not measuring
spoons. Measuring ingredients by weight, rather than volume, will
make a huge difference in your results. For general use, the scale
should measure single-gram increments. Additionally, it's useful to
have a precision scale for weighing small quantities, such as the
0.06 g of yeast called for in one of our preferments. You'll find
plenty of low-cost choices on the market that meet these
requirements.
(2) Thermometers: A digital probe version is best. Home pizza makers
will also want an oven thermometer. You can also get a combination timer / probe thermometer and take care of two helpful tools
in one.
3 Timers: It's best to have several. Make sure their alarms are loud.
4 Plastic tubs: Square clear plastic bins with airtight lids in a variety of
sizes are essential. We use the Cambro brand, which is so prevalent
in professional kitchens that "Cambro" has become almost a generic
term for tubs.
5 Plastic bags or tarps: Even clean trash bags can be used to cover
your dough to keep it from drying out. We prefer transparent compostable bags.
6 Mixer: We use an electric mixer for all ofthe pizza doughs in this
book. You can certainly mix by hand (see page 45), but this requires
more time and physical effort. We highly recommend electric mixers since most of the doughs require mixing to full gluten
development.
7 Bench knife (sometimes called a bench scraper): Use a sharp metal
8
version for cleanly cutting dough, lifting sticky dough, and scraping
dough residue off the worktable. Plastic ones are acceptable but are
generally thicker, which can sometimes be a drawback. There's a
narrow bench knife we like specifically for pizza because it's also
perfect for when we need to lift a ball of dough after fermenting (see
Resources, page 3:377). This bench knife does a much better job
than the wider ones. This tool is so practical that some pizzerias use
it to cut garlic.
Fermentation tubs: Once the dough is balled, it needs to be kept in
an airtight plastic tub while fermenting. Pizzerias use stackable tubs
because they need to handle a large volume. At home you can use
the plastic tub you bulk fermented the dough in.
or even essential. In our view, a well-stocked kitchen includes the following equipment (also illustrated on page 12).
(9 Peels: Metal peels are more suitable than wooden ones for flatbreads and pizzas because they're thinner and can easily slide under
the crusts (see page 388). Perforated metal peels have the advantage
that any excess flour used for dusting the dough will fall through.
(Baking excess flour onto a pizza dough is undesirable because it
can burn.)
10 Water spritzer: The spritzer itself is basic, but remember to change
the water in it at least weekly.
11) Sheet pans and specialized pizza pans: For some styles, making
something that looks and tastes like the real deal can hinge on the
pan. While you could technically bake all the pizzas in this book
on an aluminum shcet pan, specialized pans produce markedly
better results. Some have reinforced frames that keep them from
warping in the oven or cured surfaces to prevent the pizza from
sticking. Others are made of thicker, denser metal that produces a
crispier base.
(12 Sauce spoon/ spoodle: This is used to spoon sauce onto pizza
dough and to spread it evenly. Many pizzerias know how many
"spoonfuls" is the right amount for each pizza. We like a spoon with
a flat base for spreading.
(13) Food mill: Tomatoes are passed through the mill to make sauce
(try using one with a 8-10 mm/0.31-0.39 in holes). Some models
have interchangeable grates with different-sized holes that allow for
different-textured sauces.
(14 Box cheese grater/ food processor or Robot Coupe (both with
cheese-grating attachment blade) /cheese-grater attachment for
mixer: Any of these can be used for shredding blocks of cheese.
15) Squeeze bottle: Fill with extra-virgin olive oil or your preferred oil to
easily squeeze onto your pan or pizza before or after baking. Some
pizzerias (especially those serving Neapolitan-style pizza) use a
metal cruet with a long neck for oil, but we prefer a clear squeeze
bottle because you can more easily control dosing and also see how
much is left in the bottle.
(16) Wheel cutter: This tool is very popular for cutting pizza. It does not
tend to be very sharp but it works well for cutting pizza.
(17 Scissors: Some pizzerias use scissors (especially al taglio pizza; see
page 1:109) instead of wheel cutters or mezzalunas. Scissors give
pizza a clean cut and don't squash the rim crust that you just worked
so hard on.
(18) Baking steel or baking stone: A steel or stone will help properly bake
pizza in a home oven, combi oven, or convection oven. For more
even heat radiation, you can stack two together, but this is optional.
10 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
00:00:00
EXTRA BIG & LOUD TIMER
(16
(18
11
PIZZA MAKING TOOLS
(19 Kitchen towels: Keep a stack of clean, dry
kitchen towels on hand in place of oven
mitts, which tend to be washed less frequently and are therefore less sanitary.
Use cotton rather than synthetic fabrics,
which could melt.
(20 Bench brush: This is useful for sweeping
flour away from your work space.
(21) Marble, granite, or wooden worktable or
surface: Working directly on a stainless
steel table is not recommended for dividing and shaping dough because it tends to
stain the dough with grayish-black streaks.
(22 Bowls: It's best to have an assortment of
sizes, ideally metal, as glass tends to chip.
23 Rock and Roll Pizza Cutter or mezzaluna:
Either of these can be used to quickly cut
pizza into slices in a seesaw motion. A
serrated knife also works well when cutting bread-like pizzas.
(26 Wire rack: Use this for cooling pan-baked
pizzas after they're baked.
(24
(25
Large bench scraper or wide offset
spatula: This is helpful for lifting panbaked pizzas out of the pan without
damaging the pizza. A rubber spatula
can be used if you don't have a wide
bench scraper, but be careful not to
damage the crust.
Rolling pin: This tool is helpful when rolling out thin-crust doughs. In a commercial
setting, a sheeter serves the same function
in a fraction of the time.
(27) Oven brush: Use this to sweep debris,
such as semolina, out of the oven. Sometimes a pizza bottom will rip, leaving a
cheesy, saucy mess on your oven floor.
When this happens, you'll need a metal
bristle brush.
(28 Storage bins: We use wheeled plastic
bins that can easily be stored underneath
counters. Lidded bins can store large
quantities of grains, flour, sugar, or
other ingredients.
(19
20
(22)
(24
SPECIALIZED TOOLS
29 Pizza trays: Once a pizza is taken out of
the oven (a floor-baked pizza, that is), it's
typically put on one of these round pizza
trays for serving.
(30 Meat slicer: This is the most efficient way
to uniformly slice meats or cheeses.
31 Garlic slicer: This single-use tool is very
handy to slice garlic thinly à la minute.
32) Deli containers: Small, lightweight, reusable plastic containers with lids are invaluable for storing small amounts of salts,
spices, or other ingredients.
35)
(33 Hotel pans in various sizes: These are
useful for holding mise en place items
(cheese, sauce, other toppings).
Dough bubble poker: Sometimes a bubble in the dough (typically in the rim) will
get big and out of control, compromising
the integrity of the pizza. This long pole
with a spike at the end will take care of it
quickly by allowing you to deflate the
bubble while the pizza is in the oven.
(36 (34 Dough docking tool: Docking evenly
distributesa pattern of small holes across a
dough's surface and keeps it from puffing
up significantly. We use a rolling docker,
but a fork or the tip of a skewer or knife is
a handy alternative.
Sheet pan clamps: These make it easy
to move sheet pans around and out of
the oven.
(29
(32) 31 (33
(36
(30
35
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 13
6
Departure
ERNIST
Pizza Track
8:00 p.m.
Destination
DEPARTURES
Thin-Crust Pizza
Remarks
3:15 p.m.
Electric pizza oven
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Deck oven
4:30 p.m.
Neapolitan Pizza
Can take 153/4–46
 h, depending on thero Arrives in 2-3 3/4h
Gas-fired pizza oven
Route can take 23 1/4-281/2 h
9:30 a.m.
New York Pizza
Deck oven
Can take 38 3/4–66 3/4 h, depending on10:00 a.m.
Artisan Pizza
Gas-fired pizza oven
Can take 38 3/4–66 3/4 h, depending orv3:30 p.m.
Deep-Dish Pizza
Deck oven
4:00 p.m.
Detroit-Style Pizza
Impinger oven
7:30 p.m.
New York Square Pizza Electric deck oven
7:00 p.m.
Focaccia :15 p.m.
Al Taglio Pizze Deck oven
Electric deck oven
Arrives in 2-3 3/4h
Can take 15 3/4–46 h,depending on tvCan take 15 3/4–46 h,depending onti TICKET VENDING MACHINES
Can take 15 3/4–46 h,depending
on tArrives in 2-3 3/4 h
PLANNING TО МАКE PIZZA
With all things dough related, the number one
question you need to ask before even starting is:
When is this going to be eaten? Work backward
from there to figure out when you need to begin
making your dough. Some of our doughs are best
when they have cold-proofed for 24-48 hours.
Others have a preferment that needs to ripen
before mixing into the dough. Some have a preferment and a 24-hour cold-proof time. Others have
long bulk fermentation times. And some can be
made the same day they are eaten.
What about those times when you're just not able
to plan that far ahead? Not to worry. We developed
what we call emergency doughs for many of the
master recipes (see pages 131, 137, 147, and 163).
In a pinch, they do a pretty decent job.
FACTORS TO CONSIDER
Ingredients: What type of flour do I have?
Hopefully you have the best type for the pizza
style you want to make (see page 1:283). If you
have only pastry or cake flour in your pantry,
Pizza Gourmet Dough (see page 165) is your
best choice since most other pizza doughs
require stronger flours. Also, how much flour
do you have? A pizzeria usually has sacks on
hand, but at home, that's typically not the case.
Also check how old your flour is. The same
goes for yeast. Water isn't a huge consideration
since most tap water is fine (see page 1:291).
Thermometer: Make sure it's well calibrated.
Calibrate your scale while you're at it.
Preferments: Allot enough time to ripen your
preferment. Check for ripeness before you mix
it into a dough (see page 1:301).
Mixer(s): What is the capacity of your mixer?
See our guide on page 34 to ensure you aren't
making too much (or too little) dough for it
to handle.
When you plan to make a pizza, you must also
consider your location (altitude, temperature, and
humidity will all influence the outcome) and type of
oven (a cold wood-fired oven takes hours to reach
temperature). Adjusting for these factors will ensure
your dough doesn't overferment while sitting out on
a hot counter.
Part of your planning will involve simple math.
While dough recipes call for specific quantities of
various ingredients, it's actually the percentages
of those ingredients that are most meaningful.
Interpreting, understanding, and applying these
percentages will increase your chances of success
and give you more flexibility. You'll be able to scale
recipes up or down, for example, and determine how
much dough you can make with the amount of flour
you have on hand.
Room temperature: When we say room temperature, we mean 21-24°C/70-75° F. Extreme
conditions aren't ideal for dough, but if you
can't control the temperature of the room, you
can compensate by controlling the temperature of the ingredients. If the room is too hot,
start with lukewarm or cold water. If it's too
cold, start with warm water.
Types of dough: Many pizza doughs can be
slowed down by cold-proofing them, and
others have long bulk fermentations. This
allows a lot of flexibility and gives you more
control in getting the timing right. While there
are a couple doughs that are better day-of (like
Detroit-style pizza), you can control your timing comfortably with most pizza doughs.
Factors specific to pizzerias and other commercial pizza makers: We're not a commercial pizzeria, but we've learned a ton talking
to hundreds of pizzaioliand pizzeria owners
in our research. Throughout the book, we're
including some of the tips they shared with us.
Of course, every pizzeria's needs are different.
Make sure to factor in the timing for all
aspects of pizza making when deciding when
to start mixing your dough. For example, New
York pizza dough takes significantly more time
than Detroit-style or deep-dish, so you'll need
to plan ahead when making that style of pizza.
We made each of our master pizza
doughs and then proofed and baked
them in the style of every other master
pizza dough to come up with a list of
which doughs work for different styles.
This will allow you to make more than
one style without investing the extra
time of making a separate dough (see
page 96).
Equipment: As with mixer(s), the capacity
of the oven is important. How many pizzas
can you bake at the same time? The answer
willvary depending on the types of pizza you
make and your oven type. Neapolitan pizzas
are made to order; typically, a maximum of
two or three are baked at the same time, while
the rest of the dough balls sit in a covered tray
or sheet pan. If you're baking al taglio pizzas,
you can bake all of the dough ahead of time. If
you don't have the oven capacity to bake your
proofed dough, you're in trouble. The solution
to this dilemma doesn't necessarily involve
buying a bigger oven; the thriftier solution is
to space out mixing the dough, fermentation
time, and baking it to get the most out of your
equipment. You can also opt to slow down the
dough's fermentation by cold-proofing (see
page 70).
2/20
NY. Dough 12:30
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
6
2/3N.Y. Dough 2:30
15
Experienced pizzaioli know how much of their
dough, sauce, and cheese to have on hand at
the correct temperature during service.
If you have forgotten to drain your
fior di latte mozzarella or mozzarella
di bufala ahead of time (see page
319), you can press fresh mozzarella
on apaper towel to squeeze out the
moisture. Or if you are making a lot
of pizzas, try our method for vacuum
sealing mozzarella on page 321.
Making a sauce can be as simple as
pureeing and seasoning canned tomаtoes, but if you would like to speed
up the process of thickening a saucе,
you can add xanthan gum to instantly
thicken the sauce (see page 243).
MANAGING YOUR DOUGH
SCHEDULE
Pizza dough takes time to ferment. It's a required
step, and while some doughs take longer than others
(see page 75), you cannot rush fermentation without
drastic effects on quality. We include recipes for
emergency versions of our master doughs that can
suffice when you're short on time, but there are
undeniable tradeoffs in flavor. And once your dough
has completed the fermentation stage, the clock is
ticking. Therefore, one of the key factors for success is
to manage the schedule.
Generally, there are two types of fermentationcold-proofing in refrigeration or room-temperature
proofing. (Our bread-like doughs also do well when
proofed at higher temperatures in a proofer.) Keep
in mind that cold-proofed doughs require some
time to come up to temperature before you shape
and bake them. This takes longer than you'd think
because fermented dough is a foam, so it's a good
insulator (like styrofoam and other foams).
For those in the pizza business, there are additional considerations. Making cold-proofed doughs
allows you to hold dough over for a day or two if you
don't use all of it in one sitting.
Another good practice is to pull your coldproofed doughs out of the refrigerator to temper
(come up to room temperature) in stages instead
of pulling them all out at once. With cold-proofed
doughs you have a window of 24-48 hours
(sometimes even more). Ifthe dough feels like it is
getting too gassy (bubbly) in refrigeration, reball
it and let it rest at room temperature for at least
3-4 hours before you bake it (keep it covered at
all times). Some pizza doughs may take longer,
especially if they use stronger flour (see page 1:277).
Alternatively, once you have reballed it, it can hold
in refrigeration for up to 72 more hours.
If you know how many pizzas you expect to make
throughout the day, you can determine more or less
how many doughs you need to have ready to bake at
any given point. The key is to not forget to take the
doughs out of refrigeration 2 hours before you need
them, to temper (if they are cold-proofed). This is
a practice that we highly encourage. Some pizzaioli
recommend a minimum internal temperature of
13°C/ 55°F before shaping. In our experience, we
found that after 2 hours, the pizza reached at least
18°C/65° F. In pizzerias that do not cold-proof,
you can be sure that the pizzas served at 6 p.m. will
not be the same as those served at 11 p.m. In a hot
pizzeria, the change could be drastic. If you decide
not to cold-proof, you should at least make dough in
batches 2 hours apart so your customers can experience the best pizza possible. You can make doughs
with varying quantities of yeast. Use the doughs
with more yeast at the beginning of service and the
doughs with less yeast last.
The Timing of Pizza Making
The diagram on the next page below will guide you
through the basic steps from mixing to tempering.
We provide a comparison table for the baking times
and temperatures on page 3:8. Remember, dough
can be forgiving so long as you know how to take
advantage of its flexibility.
FACTORS THAT AFFECТ
FERMENTATION
All pizza dough has to ferment or rise, and temperature is critically important to the rate at which it
rises. Technically, this includes the temperature you
start the dough at (and its ingredients) and what
temperature you keep the dough at as it ferments.
The higher the temperature, the faster the fermentation. It's an exponential relationship, so small factors
can make a big difference.
The ambient humidity is a factor if you leave
your dough out and uncovered, which we don't
recommend. We strongly advise fermenting in a
temperature-controlled environment. Ifthe temperature fluctuates in your kitchen, we suggest proofing
in a cupboard or pantry. It's true that master pizzaioli in Naples proof at ambient temperature, but their
high skill offsets the challenges ofthis proofing setup
(see page 88).
73.
42%
16 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THERE'S MORE THAN ONE WAY TO MAKE A PIZZA
A little planning goes a long way when it comes to making pizzas. Below,
we showcase the breakdown of the timing for each of the steps in our
ten master dough recipes. As you can see, not all doughs go through
the same steps and the total time for the styles can vary widely. If you
are aware of the overall amount of time you need to make each style of
pizza, you can better plan for when you need to start, or select something
that will fit better into your schedule, like a pizza made the same day.
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST / DEEP-DISH / DETROIT-STYLE
Direct, room temperature orwarm-proofed
MIX BENCH REST DIVIDE PRESHAРE
10-20 min 15-20 min 5 min 2 min
PROOF
1/2-2 h
TOTAL TIME: 2-334 h
FOCACCIA / NEW YORK SQUARE / HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
Preferment, room temperature or warm-proofed
PREFERMENT
12-16 h before mixing
MIX
10-20 min
BULK FERMENT
2-212h
DIVIDE
5 min
PRESHAРЕ
2 min
PROOF
11/2-2 h
TOTAL TIME: 1534-22 h
NEAPOLITAN
Direct, long bulk ferment
MIX
10-20 min
BULK FERMENT
20-24 h
DIVIDE
5 min
PRESHAРЕ
2 min
PROOF
3h
TOTAL TIME: 2314-271/2 hTHIN-CRUST
Preferment, room temperature or warm-proofed
PROOF
112-2 h
PREFERMENT
12-16 h before mixing
MIX
10-20 min
DIVIDE
5 min
PRESHAРЕ
2 min
COLD-PROOF
24 h (optional)
TEMPER
2 h
TOTAL TIME: 3734-4313 h
NEW YORK/ARTISAN
Preferment, cold-proofed
PREFERMENT
12-16 h before mixing
MIX
10-20 min
BENCH REST
20 min
DIVIDE
5 min
PRESHAPЕ
2 min
COLD-PROOF
24-48 h
TEMPER
2h
TOTAL TIME: 381/2-6634 h
SHAPE
SAUCE
TOP
BAKE
6
READY TO MAKE PIZZA
EMERGENCY DOUGH TEMPERING
There are certain doughs, primarily our medium-crust doughs such as
New York, artisan, and Neapolitan pizza with poolish, that benefit from
cold-proofing. We recommended tempering these doughs for 2 hours
before baking the pizza to produce a more relaxed dough that is easier
to shape.
Tempered dough also bakes faster. A cold dough will make other
components of the pizza cold, most importantly the sauce since it is in
contact with the dough, and this slows down the overall baking time.
Cold dough will also cool your oven floor down much more dramatically; the oven floor will need time to recover its heat.
But maybe you forgot to temper the dough, or you get swamped and
don't keep up with pulling out dough to temper during service. What can
you do? One solution is within reach, assuming you have a microwave.
Microwaves have their fans and detractors. They are fantastic for certain things, like making popcorn, and awful at others, like reheating cold
pizza (see page 3:312).
A microwave works by reheating different internal areas of the food.
Because modern microwaves can be adjusted for power and intensity,
they can be controlled to microwave at minimal power, which will slowly
bringthe dough up to temperature without cooking it.
The challenge is that individual microwaves have different settings,
so it is not easy to give specific instructions on how to warm your dough.
Some microwaves have power settings that range from 10%–100% in 10%
increments, while other have ambiguous buttons that are labeled for
specific foods, like "fish sticks."
We suggest using the lowest possible setting on your microwave, and
then warming the dough in short increments of 20-30 seconds and then
letting it rest for 20-30 seconds before repeating. We successfully tempered 250 g dough balls that were at refrigerator temperatures in about
5 minutes total, including the waiting time between heating the dough,
using the 10% power setting.
It helps to have a probe thermometer to monitor the temperature in
the dough as it warms so that you don't overheat it. Ideally, do this just
once or twice since poking holes in the dough can create weak spots and
possible tears or holes as you shape the dough.
In addition to tempering, there are other emergencies that might
arise. Making dough can take a significant chunk of time, depending on
the style, so we have provided emergency versions of doughs that take
longer than 24 hours in our Pizza Dough Recipes chapter on page 81.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 17
UNDERSTANDING BAKER'S
PERCENTAGE
You can use ingredient lists and net contents tables
to compare recipes to one another, to easily scale
recipes up or down, and to understand the composition of any dough at a glance. Knowing a dough's
hydration, for instance, or its ratio of fat to flour,
can help you know ahead of time how the dough
will mix and shape, as well as how it's supposed to
turn out.
These ratios are difficult to calculate using recipe
volumes and weights, which led bakers to develop
what is called baker's percentage, also known as
baker's math. We have developed a specific percent
sign to indicate when we're using baker's percentage
() rather than scaling percentage (%). The
approach is based on the premise that everything
revolves around one primary ingredient: flour. For
each dough recipe, the flour (or flour mixture) is set
to 100%. All other ingredients are set relative to
flour, rather than to the total weight of the recipe.
This may seem confusing at first because we're
accustomed to thinking about percentages as pieces
ofa whole, but by keeping flour as the constant, we
can easily compare the ingredients of one recipe to
RECIPEВ
the ingredients of another. Recipe A (bottom left)
is a typical example of a scaled recipe, with each
ingredient occupying a percentage of the recipe's
total weight. Recipe B (bottom middle), in contrast,
is centered on the weight offlour. The weights of
ingredients in the two recipes are identical, but the
assigned percentages for recipe B-calculated relative
to flour-are different. That is, the total percentage
for recipe A is 100%, which tells you the overall
makeup of the dough; in recipe B, however, the percentages add up to 171.11, which tells you that
71.11% ofthe flour's weight is made up of other
ingredients besides flour-water, salt, and yeast
in this example. But what happens when a recipe
calls for a mixture of flours? You could theoretically
set one ofthe flours to 100%, but you'll find that
this approach makes comparisons between recipes
more difficult. We have a simpler approach: add
the flours together and set their combined weight
to 100%, as shown in recipe C (bottom right). For
example, a recipe that uses 375 g bread flour, 125
g medium rye flour, and 85 g spelt flour contains a
total of 585 g of flour, which we set to 1001.Each
additional ingredient is then assigned a percentage
that's relative to the flour mixture.
RECIPE A RECIPEC 585 g total flour weight
INGREDIENT WEIGHT % INGREDIENT WEIGHT INGREDIENT WEIGHТ
Bread flour 585 g 58.44 flour set -Bread flour 585 g 100 Bread flour 375 g
64.1
to 100
Water 400 g 39.96 Water 400 g 68.38 Spelt flour 85 g 14.53 -100%
Fine salt 12 g 1.2 Fine salt 12 g
2.05 Medium rye flour 125 g 21.37
Instant dry yeast 4g 0.4 Instant dry yeast 4g 0.68 Water 451 g 77.09
Total weight 1001 g 100 Total weight 1001 g 171.11 Fine salt 13.5 g 2.3
Instant dry yeast 4.5 g 0.77
recalculated as a percentage of flour Total weight 1054 g 180.14
RECIPE A RECIPEВ RECIPEC
0.4% instant dry yeast 0.68 instant dry yeast 0.77 instant dry yeast
1.2% salt 2.05% salt68.38% water
39.96% water
58.44% bread flour
100% bread flour
2.3% salt
77.09 water
21.37 medium rye flour
14.53 spelt flour
64.1% bread flour
multiple flours
still total 100%
18 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Calculate Baker's Percentage with a Preferment
When a preferment is required, as shown in Recipe D (below), the
baker's percentage column doesn't accurately reflect the net contents
of the recipe becausea preferment contains water, flour, and sometimes yeast, and those ingredients must be accounted for in the total
percentage. This is why we include a separate table that contains the
recipe's net contents. When scaling a recipe up or down, it's impossible
for you to know exactly how much water a dough needs if the water for
the preferment is not factored in; this logic also applies to the amount
of flour.
For any dough that usesa preferment, we detail the ingredients and
quantities for that part of the recipe separately. As you work through the
recipes, it's a good idea to memorize the ratios for the two preferments
we use (poolish and levain; see pages 1:299 and 1:302) because that
knowledge will serve as a base from which to develop your own recipes.
RECIPED RECIPED PREFERMENT
INGREDIENT WEIGH %
Preferment (poolish)
0.57% instant
dry yeast 0.1instant dry yeast
Bread flour 145 g
100 3.18 salt
Water 145 g
100
Instant dry yeast 0.15 g
0.1 57.95% water 100% water
Final dough
Bread flour 440 g
100
Water 255 g
57.95 65.91% poolish
Poolish (from above) 290 g
65.91
Fine salt 14 g 3.18
Instant dry yeast 2.5 g 0.57
Total weight of dough 1001.65 g
100
bread flour
100% bread flour
Calculating Net Contents
The poolish in recipe D comprises equal parts flour and water and
contains a small percentage of yeast. To create a net contents table,
we must add the flour, water, and yeast from the poolish to the flour,
water, and yeast in the final dough:
145 g flour from the poolish +440 g flour from the final recipe = 585 g
(this is our new 100(
145 g water from the poolish + 255 g water from the final recipe = 400 g
(68.37)
0.15 g yeast from the poolish +2.5 g yeast from the final recipe = 2.65 g
(0.45%)
These are the net contents of Recipe D:
NET CONTENTS
Poolish*
Ingredients Weight
Bread flour 585 g 100
Water 400 g 68.37
Fine salt 14 g 2.39
Instant dry yeast 2.65 g 0.45
Total weight 1,001.65 g
*No longer exists as an item because its components have been
subsumed into their respective categories
Don't confuse this table with a recipe; it is only a general outline of a recipe's contents. This recipe could be
described as a lean dough that has 68.37 hydration, contains 2.39salt, and is leavened with 0.45 yeast.
19
6
SAMPLE RECIPЕ
The following table and accompanying notes outline the calculations we
used when we created our Deep-Dish Pizza Dough with Poolish recipe
(see page 121). You'll see that there are various fats and preferments to
account for in the baker's percentage column and in the final net contents.
Note that the water and flour in the net contents are different than in the
ingredient list because ofthe flour and water that the poolish contributes.
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH WITH POOLISH
Our recipe's custom-built preferment is
a poolish made of equal amounts bread
flour and water and a small amount of
yeast. You can calculate the percentage
of yeast to use depending on when you
want to use the poolish (see Strategies for
Using Poolish, page 1:300). Both the flour
and water are set to 100.
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 28
For the Poolish
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein 60 g 1/½ cup 100
Water 60 g 14 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g 0.1
For the Dough
Water, 21°C/70°F 165 g 3/4 cup 51.56
Instant dry yeast 3.1 g 18 tsp 0.97
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein 320 g 21/3 cups 100
Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 13 cup 12.5
Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 5.63
Unsalted butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp
Fine salt 8g 17/½ tsp + 1% tsp
Yield: ~700 g
*You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring tsp yeast and dividing
it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
The fine-ground cornmeal doesn't
contribute to the gluten structure
of the dough, so we don't include it
in the 100flour percentage.
5.63
2.5
20
Butter is made up of about
81 fat and 19 water, so
you must add these values
separately to the lard and
water amounts to arrive at
the correct figures for the
Net Contents table.
NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight
Flour 380 g
100
Water 228 g
60
Cornmeal 40 g 10.53
Fat 33 g 8.68
Salt 8g 2.11
Yeast 3.16 g
0.83
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Don't forget to include the components of the poolish (flour,
water, and yeast) and the butter
(fat and water) in the net contents.
The baker's percentages in the
Net Contents table are calculated
based on this new flour amount.
HOW TO Calculate Ingredient Weight Using Baker's Percentage ()
1
If you know only the baker's percentage and need to calculate the weight of each ingredient, use the following method:
Determine the desired yield or desired dough weight (DDW).
(Example: DDW = 10 kg)
2 Add up all the baker's percentages.
(Example: total baker's percentage = 228.31)
3 Divide the DDW by the total baker's percentage ofthe formula
(DDW + total baker's percentage). This is the weight equivalent
to 1% of the formula.
(Example: 10 kg + 228.31 = 43.8 g)
4 Multiply the 1% weight by the baker's percentage for each ingredient
to obtain its weight.
INGREDIENTS
Bread flour 100
Water 57.9
Poolish 66.64
Fine salt 3.19
Instant dry yeast 0.58
Total 228.31
INGREDIENTS 1% PART WEIGHT INGREDIENT
WEIGHT
Bread flour 100 x 43.8 = 4.38 kg
Water 579 x 43.8 = 2.54 kg
Poolish 66.64 x 43.8 = 2.92 kg
Fine salt 3.19 x 43.8 =139.72 g
Yeast 0.58 x 43.8 = 25.4 g
Total 228.31 ~10 kg
It's important to accurately weigh ingredients. If you plan to mix right away, we recommend adding
the ingredients straight into a mixing bowl on the scale. Weighing out ingredients in advance can
save time. Store the ingredients in separate containers until the moment of mixing, at which point
the ingredients can go into the mixing bowl all at once.
HOW TO Scale Recipes without Using Baker's Percentage
Sometimes you need to adjust a recipe's total dough yield. If you want to
determine the weight of ingredients for a new recipe yield without using
baker's percentage, you should calculate the recipe conversion factor
1 Calculate the RCF by dividing the desired new yield by the original
yield.
N+O = RCF
(Example: 3 kg + 1.707 kg = 1.76)
N,= new yield
O, = original yield
Bread flour
Water
(RCF). Once you know the RCF, you can figure out the amount needed of
each ingredient through simple math. You should keep in mind that the
dough may behave differently if you are scaling up the recipe dramatically.
2 Multiply the weight of each ingredient in the original recipe by the
RCF to obtain the new weights for your dough.
ORIGINAL RECIPE NEW RECIPE
INGREDIENT WEIGHТ INGREDIENT WEIGHТ
1 kg Bread flour 1.76 kg
700 g
Water 1.23 kg
Instant dry yeast 5g Instant dry yeast 8.8 g
Salt 2g Salt 3.5 g
Yield 1.707 kg Yield 3.002 kg
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 21
6
MIXING
Gluten is a self-organizing protein. This doesn't
mean you can pour water on flour and walk away,
hoping that dough will develop. You have to give
it a little jump-start to distribute the ingredients
evenly. That jump-start involves mixing. The most
important function of mixing is to force the flour
to hydrate, which unleashes a cascade of chemical
reactions. Hydration, not kneading, is what allows a
gluten network to develop (see page 29).
Hydration can be accomplished slowly by simply
combining the ingredients and allowing the flour to
absorb the water over time, or faster by manipulating
the dough by hand, or in minutes or seconds by
machines. The faster the mix, the faster the hydration-and the faster the dough will develop. We
cover both approaches in this chapter.
Pizza makers tend to passionately promote their
own chosen mixing method above all others or insist
that a specific mixer must be used for a particular
type of pizza dough (such as the fork mixer for
Neapolitan pizza dough). If one method works well
for you, great. But the strong opinions tend to be
more about personal preferences and production
requirements rather than absolute rules. The reality
is, there's more than one way to make very good
dough, and the choice is yours. This is not to say that
all mixing methods are the same (or that all mixing
methods are suited for all styles of pizza dough).
Machine mixing speeds up the overall process and
can create a different texture in the final pizza. And
it's certainly possible to overmix and create a ropy
dough (see page 36).
Moreover, while hand-mixing can produce good
results, it's not always practical, especially when
making large amounts of dough in commercial environments. Also, most pizza doughs require mixing to
full gluten development, which is daunting to do by
hand. We like to let the machines do the work.
Machine mixing has a secondary effect: it creates
friction, which generates heat and warms the dough.
This heat helps not only with hydration but also
with fermentation because yeast works faster at
warmer temperatures. These factors make a mixer
particularly helpful if you don't have time to let
the dough fully hydrate on its own as the no-knead
method requires. The amount of mixing affects how
all the ingredients function together.
We mix most of our thin- and medium-crust
pizza doughs to full gluten development, which
means that no bulk fermentation is needed; the
exception is our master Neapolitan dough, which is
bulk fermented for 20-24 hours. We then divide and
preshape the dough, which needs to relax for 3-4
hours before shaping and baking. The majority of
our bread-like doughs are mixed to medium gluten
development and then bulk fermented, with a series
of folds that allow the dough to finish developing
(Detroit-style pizza dough is the exception).
Another concept that's intertwined with mixing
is autolyse (see page 32). The intent is to decrease
the amount of active time spent mixing because the
flour becomes hydrated in this initial rest time so the
gluten development chain reaction can begin. Note
that while autolyse does shorten the time spent mixing, it doesn't really save any time since the dough
rests for 20-30 minutes. We found that it is not a
necessary step if you are going to mix a dough to full
gluten development in the mixer. However, for our
high-hydration doughs that are mixed to medium
gluten development, we do generally recommend an
autolyse step (we do autolyse our Quad Cities pizza
dough, which is mixed to full gluten development).
This image shows the gluten networkat
the microscopic level. We washed away the
starch granules before looking at the dough
under a scanning electron microscope. The
resulting image shows an entangled network
of gluten strands that resemble a jumble of
highway interchanges.
The proofing method we developed
for our master Neapolitan dough is
exceptional. We discovered it only
after extensive experimentation on
many mixing and proofing variables
(see page 88).
Although you can mix either by hand or by
machine, we recommend machine mixing for
all of our doughs and provide instructions
for a variety of mixers in the Pizza Dough
Recipes chapter on page 81.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 23
6
50 um
Dough develops its structure with mixing
and time. Here, dough has been stained
and observed at low (left) and high (right)
magnification. The gluten appears red, and
the white and pale-blue discs are the starch.
When dough reaches full gluten development,
its components have organized into a cohesive
and regular structure, with the starch granules
evenly spread throughout the gluten matrix.
What happens if you don't mix? We sprinkled
a few drops of water onto flour to find out.
Even given an hour, the water could penetrate
only a few millimeters. Then as it dried, the
surface tension caused it to curl. Water stops
migrating into the flour because the flour
particles swell and effectively dam up the
flow. Flour needs help-it's why you need to
put effort into mixing.
THE DETAILS OF MIXING
The main point of mixing is to hydrate the flour.
Environmental and physical factors also play a part
in the speed of gluten development and the size
and distribution of bubbles in the dough. The size
of your flour particles will make a difference, as will
the temperature of your dough, which will depend
on your choice of mixing methods (see pages 34
and 45). There are many methods, and the one you
choose will affect your workflow and the characteristics of your final dough.
When flour is mixed with water, proteins in
the flour called glutenin and gliadin are hydrated.
They're known as gluten-forming proteins because
they bind almost immediately to form gluten.
Proteases (protein-snipping enzymes) cut the gluten
strands into smaller pieces that are able to make
additional connections (see page 29). As the gluten
further develops through the mixing process, the
chains become more numerous and elongated, and
they organize into a cross-linked net that is both
extensible and elastic. That rubbery framework will
give the dough structure and allow it to expand as
the yeast creates gas.
Using an electric mixer will speed up the process,
which has practical importance to pizza makers. The
amount ofwater in the mix also influences this process. The more water you add, the more extensible
the dough will be, which can make it unwieldy. On
the other hand, the stiffer the dough, the stronger it
will be, which can make it harder to stretch. Often,
the area in between those extremes is the best. The
amount of water also has a direct effect on both
enzymatic activity and fermentation: more water
means increased activity and vice versa.
While proteases are slicing up strands of
gluten, other enzymes are at work on starch. Flour
typically contains only 1%–2% simple sugar, which
isn't enough food for the yeasts; without greater
sustenance, they can't make a dough rise because
there isn't enough sugar to create carbon dioxide.
The flour's starch must be broken down into simple
sugars that yeasts can consume and convert. The
multistep enzymatic process that breaks down
the starch begins with amylase, which works on
the components of damaged starch: amylose and
amylopectin. (About 4% ofthe starch granules are
broken during milling, which is an important step;
an enzyme can't enter an intact starch granule.)
The Mixing Trade-Off:
Intensity versus Time
You can mix fast and hard or slowly and gently, but
mixing is mandatory. Stir dry flour as quickly as you
like; it will never turn into dough unless you add
water. Or, conversely, add flour to water and let it sit
in the bowl without stirring-again, the mixture will
not turn into dough on its own.
The reason you have to mix flour with water to
fully develop the gluten network comes down to
physical chemistry. Mixing performs two indispensable operations. First, it spreads the water evenly
throughout the flour, a process called dispersion.
Second, mixing chemically alters the gluten proteins
in the flour, a process known as hydration. To get a
good, uniform dough, you have to do both operations-and dispersion has to happen either before
hydration or in tandem with it.
But there is no law that dictates the best mixing
method, speed, or time to produce a particular kind
of dough. You can get the same good results using
a wide range of methods if you understand how to
trade off time and intensity-and how high-energy
mixing can cause side effects.
Water can move only so far on its own through
a mass of flour. It needs the push of mechanical
agitation to achieve full dispersion. That's why
even slow-mixing techniques used for autolyse and
no-knead doughs include an initial stirring step.
Hydration happens quickly, but it takes time to
form the chemical attachments that knit gluten proteins together into an elastic network. That's why
even very high-energy mixing techniques involve
some stirring.
Think of it this way: mixing = mechanical power
x time. The more time you allow, the less energetic
the stirring can be. You can make a no-knead dough
using very little physical effort if you have hours to
spare. Pros typically make the opposite trade-off:
they use powerful, fast-moving mixers to shorten
the timelines.
Machine mixing can have side effects that may be
desirable in some situations. Friction is one of them:
the faster you stir, the more the dough heats up. This
can accelerate fermentation. Excessive heat also can
impact fermentation. If yeasts get too warm, they
feed too quickly, and flavor doesn't develop properly.
Also, your dough can quickly overproof.
All mixing methods perform essentially the
same operations-diffusion and hydration-but at
different rates and with subtle differences in their
side effects. Less Mechanical effort More
Mixing = mechanical power x time. This graph
depicts the trade-off between mechanical
power and time when mixing dough. The more
powerful the mixer, the less time needed to
mix the dough. However, the more powerful
the mixer, the more friction is produced, which
can lead to unwanted heat transfer.
Van Over method
Machine mix
Hand mix
No-knead
1s 10 s 45 s 1 min 40s 5 min 16 min 2 hr 45 min
Time
High Temperature gain Low
6
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Doughs mixed in a food processor (top) use
a high amount of mechanical power in a very
short amount of time: 45 seconds to reach full
gluten development. Doughs mixed by hand
(left) are on the other end of the spectrum and
require a long bulk fermentation stage to allow
the gluten to develop.
25
GLUTEN YEAST STARCH
WHAT HAPPENS INSIDE PIZZA DOUGH
If you want to control the quality of your pizza or adjust the recipe for
different circumstances, it helps to know what's happening behind
every change that you see, feel, and smell. As flour is hydrated, enzymes
break down some damaged starch molecules into sugars, and proteins
combine to form elastic gluten strands, as we discuss at length on page
29. Through respiration and fermentation, yeast cells produce carbon
dioxide, which gathers in tiny air pockets in the dough (see page 71).
These bubbles inflate, are trapped by the web of gluten strands in the
Ingredient preparation
Starch
granule
- Amylose
-Amylopectin Amylase
Mix
H₂O
Bulk ferment
Flour
FLOUR, STARCH, AND ENZYMES
Flour contains the enzyme amylase as well as starch
granules that house molecules of amylose and amylopectin. During milling, up to 12% of the starch granules
are damaged, causing cracks to form on their surfaces.
ENZYMATIC BREAKDOWN
Water and amylase enter damaged starch granules through cracks. The granules become hydrated, and the enzymes
break down starch molecules into sugars. Intact starch granules are broken down much more slowly.
Yeast Sugar
CO
H,0
Aromatic
compounds
Ethanol
CO
ACTIVATION
Bakers bloom (i.e., submerge in water) dry
yeast to activate it.
AEROBIC FERMENTATION
Mixing disperses yeast cells and air throughout the dough. Using
available oxygen to metabolize sugar, the cells respire, which rapidly
produces water and large quantities of CO₂.
CELL DIVISION
Under aerobic conditions, the yeast buds and creates more yeast cells.
FERMENTATION
Respiration continues, but the oxygen supply is
depleted quickly, so yeast cells begin a shift to
anaerobic fermentation. The cells produce ethanol,
aromatic compounds, and CO2, all of which gather
into tiny air bubbles made during mixing.
Glutenin
GLUTEN DEVELOPMENT
Water disperses and hydrates glutenin and gliadin. The
molecules stick together and form chains that break
and reform as mixing continues.
Flour Gliadin Gluten
PROTEIN CONTENT
Wheat flour contain proteins called glutenin and gliadin
that form gluten when hydrated.
26 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
-Bond GLUTEN MATRIX
Chains of gluten grow longer and strongeras more
and more molecules stick together. The long chains
form a flexible, weblike matrix that traps bubbles
full of CO2, air, ethanol, and other compounds.
dough, redistribute and subdivide as the pizza dough
is shaped, and then expand again in a controlled
way as the dough proofs. The dough further expands
in the oven, in a process known as oven spring, as
yeast cells produce a final rush of carbon dioxide
when heated until the dough becomes hot enough
to kill the yeast. With the oven's heat, starch granules
gelatinize, while sugars brown the crust through the
Maillard reaction (see page 393).
Shape Final proof
-Amylase
Amylopectin Amylose
ENZYMATIC BREAKDOWN (CONTINUED)
Sugars
Gel
Bake
Maillard
reaction
in crust
Cool
BROWNING
The surface of the rim and under crust dries out, allowing the
surface temperature to exceed 100°C/212°F, causing Maillard
reactions to occur more and more quickly.
GELATINIZATION
As the dough heats, the surfaces of undamaged granules
crack. They swell with water and expel starch molecules.
Between 60°C and 80°C/140°F and 176°F, the molecules
form a gel.
RETROGRADATION
Gelatinized starch slowly recrystallizes.
Water migrates out of the granules, and
the molecules restructure into more
organized chains. Staling occurs through
retrogradation and dehydration.
Aromatic
compounds <50 °C/122 °F > 50°C/122 °F
Ethanol
CO₂
REDISTRIBUTION
Yeast cells are redistributed as the
dough takes shape, exposing the cells
to new supplies of sugar to ferment.
FERMENTATION
Fermentation continues, but the
baker can regulate proofing time by
adjusting the temperature.
OVEN SPRING
The rate of fermentation increases as the dough heats. Yeast
cells expel bursts of CO₂ until the temperature reaches 50°C/
122°F, at which time the microbes begin to die. The Maillard
reaction occurs when the crust exceeds 130°C/265°F, causing
it to brown.
FLAVOR LOSS
Aromatic compounds contribute to the
crust's freshly baked flavor. Over time, they
dissipate, changing the taste and aroma.
이
6
STRETCHING
The gluten matrix stretches
to accommodate increasing
gas pressure in the bubbles
caused by the expansion of
CO2 and the vaporization of
water. Proteins coagulate.
and starches gelatinize to set
the structure of the crumb.
MIGRATION
Q
Water migrates back into the gluten matrix
and/or escapes from the crust. The pizza
crust dries as more water is lost.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 27
THE SCIENCE OF HOW BUBBLES ARE BORN
Mixing transforms ingredients into dough in four distinct ways. The first is
obvious: it disperses the flour, water, and other ingredients. The second
and third are subtler but intuitive: mixing hydrates the starches and proteins in the flour by attaching water molecules to them, and it develops
bonds among gluten strands. Hydration and gluten development are
what make dough stretchy.
The fourth function is just as indispensable as the others, yet it's rarely
mentioned: mixing aerates the dough. Although air is never listed in recipes, it's a crucial ingredient, not for what it is-mostly nitrogen and оxygen-but for what it does: it forms myriad minuscule bubbles throughout
the dough.
In a classic experiment in the 1940s, researchers (one of them aptly
named J. C. Baker) tried making dough without air by mixing inside a vacuum chamber. The resulting bread was bizarre. The crumb looked like
a honeycomb. Instead of the usual arrangement of thousands of small
cells spread throughout the loaf, all the cells were huge and there were
far fewer of them. The researchers' conclusion, which other work has
confirmed, was that air bubbles created during mixing are essential to a
proper crumb structure because they serve as nucleation sites, starting
points for the balloon-like cells that inflate during fermentation and the
initial stages of baking.
Why doesn't yeast make the bubbles itself? The short answer is, it
can't. The longer answer involves a phenomenon known as Laplace
pressure. You know about surface tension, which is what draws a raindrop into a spherical shape as it falls through the air. Laplace pressure is
the surface tension that squeezes abubble of gas drifting in a fluid (or in
a stretchy semifluid, like dough). The smaller the gas bubble, the higher
the Laplace pressure and the harder it is to inflate the little bubble. Taken
to its logical extreme, this is why we can't form an infinitesimal bubble.
A bubble's surface tension is inversely dependent on its radius, so a zero
radius bubble would require infinite energy to form.
When yeast secretes carbon dioxide, that gas is always dissolved in
the water surrounding the yeast cells. Absent a nucleation site, the only
way a bubble can form is if the carbon dioxide happens to collect in
one spot, come out of solution, and build up enough concentration to
overcome the Laplace pressure. That's a bit like an empty balloon spontaneously inflating. It just doesn't happen.
But when you stir ingredients together or tumble them into each
other in a mixer, you trap little pockets of air inside the forming dough.
These bubbles are mostly so small-typically under 0.01 mm across-that
they are barely visible to the naked eye. But they're big enough to reduce
the Laplace pressure to the point that inflation can get going.
The same principle is at work when beer foams as it's poured into
a pint glass. Beer in the bottle is highly carbonated. Yet it just sits there
when you pop off the cap. It's not until you pour the liquid out and
entrain air bubbles that you get a fine, bubbly head.
Bubbles also form so readily in dough because the geography is welcoming. The rough edges of flour particles are ideal territory for trapping
the little air bubbles that act as nucleation sites. You can see the importance of texture if you plunge a wooden dowel into a glass of soda water
versus a glass rod. Tiny bubbles will cling much more readily to the rough
dowel than to the smooth rod.
Each of the air bubbles created during mixing has the potential to
turn into a larger cell in the crumb as it expands during proofing and
baking (for details on the latter, see The Science of How Bubbles Grow in
Dough, page 70). You can thus exercise some control over the texture of
the crumb by changing the number of bubbles in the dough. And you do
that by adjusting your mixing technique.
It's like beating egg whites. If you stir the whites with a spoon,you
can make an egg-white omelet that is slick and solid. Beat them gently with a fork for a slightly airy omelet, or vigorously with a whisk fora
much fluffier one. With a hand blender, you can whip eggs into a foam
as thick and uniform as shaving cream. Similarly, when you mix dough,
the more energy you put in and the higher the speed and shear forces of
the mixing tool, the smaller, more uniform, and more numerous the air
bubbles will be. Smaller, however, is not necessarily better. Remember
the Laplace pressure: smaller bubbles resist inflation more than bigger
ones do.
Bubbles must appear from somewhere; they have to grow from nucleation sites.
The nooks and crannies of a rough wooden dowel (right) serve as better nucleation sites than the smooth surface of a glass rod (left). When we inserted both
into a glass of carbonated water, the agitation caused the carbon dioxide to
come out of solution, making more bubbles stream off from the wooden dowel
than the glass rod. The nucleation sites in dough come from tiny air bubbles
introduced during mixing.
GLUTEN DEVELOPMENT
Gluten goes through many changes from the time
the dough is barely mixed until it's fully developed,
but the three distinct stages outlined below are generally accepted as benchmarks. The method used to
check gluten development is called the windowpane
test (see page 30) and involves taking a portion of
dough in your hands and stretching it: the more the
dough can stretch without tearing, the more the gluten has developed. Visual and tactile clues identify
each stage, but both home and commercial pizza
makers can have issues assessing gray areas.
Factors of Proper Gluten Development
Gluten gives body and structure to a dough, holding
all the components in place. It's what makes a baked
pizza pleasantly chewy and springy. It's also the elusive element that's hard to re-create when you make
gluten-free doughs, which can depend on other
ingredients such as egg whites for structure. Nearly
every element of the mixing process can affect
the gluten's development and the corresponding
strength of the dough.
Ingredients are the first variables in the process,
particularly flour. Protein content varies among
flours, and the higher the protein content, the more
gluten the dough can typically form. Some wheat
varieties, including semolina and most ancient
grains, don't have good gluten-forming properties,
which is why they are often blended with other
flours in dough recipes (see page 181).
The quantity of water also plays into the process.
Adding too little water won't work; the flour must
be sufficiently hydrated to activate the proteins that
form gluten. Too much water also causes problems,
resulting in more of a batter than a dough; a gluten
network will form but never produce a cohesive
mass. Salt strengthens gluten bonding, which is why
dough tightens when you add salt after autolyse. Fats
also slow down the process by coating the protein
strands, which is one reason enriched doughs call for
longer mixing times.
Time serves as a general tool for controlling
gluten development: the longer the flour and water
spend together during the hydration process, the
more numerous the gluten bonds will be, while
a longer mixing time will speed up hydration by
forcing the water into the flour. Time also allows
enzymes to assist in gluten development and, most
notably, in extensibility. Mixing methods also matter.
Hand-mixing techniques won't hydrate the doughand develop the gluten-as fast as machines.
We highly recommend mixing high-hydration
dough by machine because it will take significantly longer to develop sufficient gluten if
you mix by hand. These slack doughs are also
hard to handle, so it's better to let your mixer
handle the job.
WHAT KIND OF STUFF IS DOUGH?
Is dough, in chemical terms, a mixture, a colloid, a solution, or a gel?
Once you have added the liquid ingredients to the dry and stirred the
mixture sufficiently to make it homogeneous, it's no longer a mixture
because there's no mechanical process that can separate the flour, salt,
water, and other ingredients back into their starting states. A colloid, also
known as a colloidal suspension, consists of chemically distinct particles
dispersed evenly throughout a liquid medium. A well-blended vinaigrette, for example, is a colloid; so is mayonnaise. Dough is not because
the substances in it don't aggregate into particles (some gluten-free
doughs are exceptions).
Dough made with wheat flour certainly contains a highly concentrated solution of salts, sugars, proteins, fats, and starches, all dissolved
in a relatively small amount ofwater. But the network of tangled gluten
proteins that gives dough its elasticity traps minuscule pockets of that
solution, like fish in a net. Raw dough is thus a gel, technically speaking.
Dough that has risen contains tiny bubbles of gas, which fill with water
vapor, carbon dioxide, and ethanol as the dough bakes and solidifies.
Proofed dough is a closed-cell foam; baked pizza dough is an open-cell
foam (like a sponge). Fully baked pizza, then, is a set foam. Like other
solid foams, baked pizza (the dough part) is an insulator that tends to
trap heat rather than transmit it.
Baked dough
Raw dough
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 29
6
Low Gluten Development
Mixing a dough to low gluten development involves
combining all the ingredients by hand or machine
and then allowing for a long bulk fermentation in
combination with a series of folds to develop the
gluten and strengthen the dough. In this book we do
not mix any doughs to this stage, but if you choose
to mix your doughs by hand, this is a way to produce
a dough without a lot of physical effort.
After mixing to low gluten development, gluten
chains have begun to form, and the dough is more
cohesive. If you were to perform a windowpane test,
the dough would tear immediately. The primary
difference between mixing to shaggy mass and low
gluten development is that the dough is smoother
and more uniform in the latter case. This time will
vary depending on the type of mixer that you are
using. The higher the hydration percentage of the
dough, the longer it will take to mix.
Medium Gluten Development
Our higher-hydration doughs are mixed to medium
gluten development to strengthen them and form an
open crumb structure. These doughs are then bulk
fermented to allow the dough to reach full gluten
development.
The dough is now much smoother and more
cohesive. As you mix, it will start to pull away from
the side of the bowl but not completely. If you
perform the windowpane test, the dough will stretch
for 2-3 seconds before it tears. The average mixing
time can vary greatly, ranging from 4 minutes for a
stand mixer to over an hour for a diving arm mixer.
We recommend mixing to this point for bread-like
pizza doughs like New York square pizza dough and
high-hydration al taglio pizza dough.
Full Gluten Development
Full gluten development consists offully developing
the dough in the mixer, followed by a very short
bulk fermentationless than an hour if used at all;
otherwise just a bench rest of 15-20 minutesbefore dividing and shaping. At this point the gluten
has completely developed in the dough. The dough
will look very smooth and have a lot of stretch (due
to the gluten) and in some instances a bit of shine
(mostly in doughs that contain fat, like our Brazilian
thin-crust pizza dough).
The dough spends a long time in the mixer,
being relentlessly mixed by the hook. This results
in two distinct effects on the baked pizza: because
of the excessive oxidation of the dough, the pizza
will have a very white crumb, and because gluten
development in the dough is aggressive, the crumb
will usually be very tight if it's in the lower hydration
range (50–60). In higher-hydration doughs,
we don't see a negative effect on the crumb.
Despite these often undesirable consequences,
we recommend mixing the majority of our doughs to
full gluten development. We mix our high-hydration
doughs to medium gluten development and then
use folds to develop the gluten fully. It's important
for these doughs to reach full gluten development
because you need a very strong gluten network to
support the additional water.
If you perform a windowpane test, the dough
will hold the window for at least 8-10 seconds (see
image below), and it can be stretched to the point
that it is nearly see-through. This mixing stage is
best done by machine, as it requires a lot of effort;
it is recommended for most of the thin- and medium-crust doughs. Average mixing time will depend
on the type of mixer that you are using and the style
of dough (see our recommended times in each of the
master recipes). БАЗА ПРЕМИУ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
Low gluten development Medium gluten development Full gluten development
доступ ко всей базе 400р
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 110)
Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page 124)
New York Pizza Dough (see page 132)
Sfincione Dough (see page 157)
Pizza Gourmet Dough (see page 165)
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough (see page 118)
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Although proper gluten development is crucial
when mixing a dough, it isn't the only factor in
how a pizza turns out. Thin-crust and Neapolitan pizza dough are both mixed to full gluten
development, but they have very different
crumbs because of their hydration levels and
the way they are shaped. The same is true of
deep-dish dough, which is mixed to the same
gluten development stage as the pan-baked
pizzas shown above, but it has 15%-252
less water than the other doughs.
31
6
BL
We aim for a maximum dough temperature
of 25°C/78°F when it comes off the mixer
(it should be within 3-4°C/5-7°F of this
temperature). If it is warmer than this temperature, you can place it in the refrigerator
or on a marble surface to cool.
We perform an autolyse on both our focaccia
(top) and high-hydration al taglio (bottom)
doughs to give the flour additional time to
hydrate. These doughs have the two highest
hydration levels in the book.
DESIRED DOUGH TEMPERATURE
Controlling temperature is one of the prerequisites
for great baking, and temperature affects the outcome at several stages of the pizza-making process.
It obviously matters a great deal during baking, and
also during fermentation and proofing. Some baking
books and experts go on at great length about the
importance of temperature during mixing as well.
They give rules for determining the desired dough
temperature (DDT), a target temperature that will
let you know when mixing is done. And they offer
formulas for calculating how warm or cold the water
should be when you add it to the flour-though
these formulas usually use an imprecise, empirically
derived friction factor that isn't very accurate. But
does temperature really matter that much during
mixing? We did a set of experiments to find out.
We prepared doughs and varied the mixer used,
mix time, and water temperature to see the effects on
DDT. Our conclusion is that hitting the DDT on the
nose isn't important for most pizza makers in homes,
restaurants, and small commercial operations,
especially if you can extend your bulk fermentation
time. It's much more important to control the temperature of the fermentation environment. We do
want to note that pizza dough doesn't immediately
cool down in the refrigerator when you cold-proof
it. If you start with a dough that is too warm, it may
overproof by the time the 48 hours is up. The ideal
temperature of the final dough should be 24-25° C/
75-78°F. You should also make sure that all of the
ingredients are at around 21°C/70° F. Otherwise,
you might need to start with colder water.
WHAT IS AUTOLYSE?
Autolyse is a two-stage mixing technique that gained
currency-and a fancy name-back in 1974, when
French baker Raymond Calvel published a technical
article that described the method and touted it as
a way to deal with extremely strong wheat flours.
Calvel coined the term "autolyse" (sometimes
spelled "autolyze") from "autolysis," a term used
in biology to describe the process of self-digestion
that cells undergo as they die and are dismantled
by the enzymes inside them. A peach ripening in a
fruit basket, for example, softens mainly due to the
enzymatic destruction of autolysis. Flour contains
natural enzymes, too, and Calvel's idea was that giving those enzymes water and time would boost their
activity and allow them to soften up the starches and
proteins in the dough.
Definitions of the term and opinions on its use
have taken off in many directions in the decades
since. This method is most often used in bread
bakeries rather than pizzerias. There's considerable
disagreement as what to include in an autolyse and
whether it's actually useful in a contemporary setting. The more popular variants differ in what initially
goes into the flour and water and how long the wet
flour is left to sit before salt and other ingredients are
added and mixing begins in earnest. Many books even
refer to autolyse as a resting period after combining
all ingredients. And modern cookbooks from many
leading bakers do not include an autolyse step.
There are plenty of ways to mix a proper dough
and make a fine baked pizza, and including an autolyse stage is just one of them. Is it worth it? Are there
32 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
certain applications where it's best? The whole point
of autolyse is to hydrate the flour, which kick-starts
enzymatic activity and gluten development, thus
reducing mixing time (though perhaps not overall
time). Autolyse also reduces the chance of overmixing, which can harm the flavor, crumb texture, and
color of the pizza.
That's the argument, anyway. We conducted
a series of experiments when we wrote Modernist
Bread and concluded there is some value to this
step for making bread, but it depends on your time,
workflow, and what kind of bread you're making.
We saw the best results using a methodology that's
somewhat different from that developed by Raymond Calvel. In our experiments with French lean
breads, autolyse improved volume and produced a
dough that was easier to handle, easier to shape, and
more attractive, with a pleasing creamy-yellow tint.
These benefits exist, but they're also not particularly
pronounced. And when we tested this method for
pizza, there was practically no benefit for doughs
mixed to full gluten development-which is most
of our thin- and medium-crust doughs. We did find
some benefits of autolyse for high-hydration doughs,
like Focaccia Dough (see page 148) and HighHydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158).
The bottom line is, autolyse isn't anything magical.
It was simply Calvel's technique-focused recommendation for boosting volume, but as we've found,
there are many other techniques and ingredients
that can achieve the same goal (see page 1:324).
THE ORDER OF THE INGREDIENTS
In theory, for simple doughs-such as our Brazilian
thin-crust or deep-dish-the order in which you
mix the ingredients shouldn't matter. Mindful of
time constraints, many pizzaioli learn quickly that it
doesn't matter whether the water or flour goes into
the mixer first so long as they turn the machine on at
low speed (or start mixing by hand) soon after the
ingredients are combined.
Some pros recommend starting with the liquid
components (water/preferments), adding the yeast
next so that it blooms, and then adding the flour last
(in some recipes, salt and any oil is added once the
dough has mixed for a few minutes). The thinking
is that this sequence results in a more efficient mix,
and we do use this method in the bulk of our recipes.
In our tests, however, the order in which the ingredients were combined made little difference in terms
of the final product. For consistency, all our recipes
specify adding the ingredients in a particular order,
because this forms a habit of following a process,
which will come in handy so you don't forget to
add ingredients (salt being the one a lot of people
forget, followed by yeast). This approach also helps
those who are new to mixing and baking develop
consistent skills.
There are a few caveats, however. If you're
using the autolyse method, mix the salt in some of
the water (about 5%-10%) that is called for in the
recipe. Mix the flour and the rest of the water (you
may bloom commercial yeast in the water or mix it
in with the flour to disperse it first) to a shaggy mass,
let the dough rest 20-30 minutes, and then add the
salt water; doing so will help disperse the salt more
evenly throughout the dough.
For nearly all preferments, you'll pour the water
into the bowl or tub the dough is being mixed in,
then pour the preferment on top of the water. We
like to pour our preferments on top of the water
to see ifthey float; this shows if the preferment is
healthy and ripe. You can dissolve the preferment
into the water with your hands by squeezing and
stirring it, before adding the flour on top, which may
save some mixing later.
For more involved doughs, the order of the
ingredients becomes less flexible. Solid ingredients
(inclusions) such as nuts and fruit should be added
to the dough when it has reached medium gluten
development. The inclusions are placed on top of
the dough in the mixer, which should be turned to
low speed. The dough should continue to mix slowly
and only until all the inclusions have been fully
incorporated. Inclusions with sharp edges, such as
slivered almonds, can potentially tear the dough and
cause structural damage.
We recommend withholding the salt from the
dough if you are using the autolyse method.
Just be sure not to forget to add it in when the
autolyse step is complete.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 33
6
Pour in the oil into the dough in a slow, steady
stream while the mixer is running on low or
medium speed. Make sure that it isn't running
so fast that the oil sloshes out.
Stand mixers and commercial planetary
mixers are designed so that the hook
(or paddle or whip) attachment doesn't
come in contact with the bowl. Metal
rubbing on metal can be dangerousand metal particles that find their way
into the dough can turn up in the baked
pizza, which is a health hazard.
MACHINE MIXING
Each type of mixer has characteristics that make it
better suited for a specific work environment. There
are differences in size and capacity; a stand mixer, for
example, works in much the same way a commercial
planetary mixer does, but the amount of dough they
can handle varies. There are also differences in the
way they mix. The goal for any mixer is to emulate
how the human hand mixes-and which machine
does that best depends on the pizza maker's preferences.We use a stand mixer for small/home quantities (1-2 kg/2.2-4.4 lb), a commercial planetary
mixer for larger quantities (3-8 kg/6.6–17.6 lb), and
a spiral mixer, a diving arm mixer, or a fork mixer for
larger amounts (8 kg/ 17.6 lb and above).
The larger the volume of dough, the longer the
mixing time, which is not always ideal. Keep in mind
that for any given mixer, increasing the mixing time
or speed will increase the energy transfer to the
dough and produce more heat. In extreme cases, the
dough will start to leach water and become ropy, а
sure sign of gluten overstrengthening (dough overmixing, although this is really hard to make happen,
even deliberately). Consider the mixing times in the
master dough recipes as guidelines. The real indicator is always what you see; use the windowpane test
to check for gluten development.
The Right Amount of Dough
The amount of dough you can mix at any given time
depends on the capacity of your mixer, of course, but
a good rule of thumb is to fill the mixer's bowl no
more than halfway. If you load the bowl more, your
dough will take longer to mix.
When you're determining how much dough to
mix, consider whether the hook will be able to catch
the dough. If there's a very small amount of dough,
the hook will begin to spin and then hover over the
ingredients at the base ofthe bowl, barely touching
them. At the opposite end of the spectrum, too
much dough can also be a problem. The dough will
start to climb up the hook, where it won't get mixed
and developed, and the mixing process will take
longer. In addition, using more dough than a mixer
was designed to handle will generate more heat and
cause more wear and tear on the motor.
Too little dough Too much dough Just right
DOUGH CAPACITY
The following table provides general guidelines for the volume of dough we recommend forthe most common sizes of mixer bowls.
Mixer size/type
3.8-4.7 L/4-5 qt stand mixer bowl
5.7-7.6 L/6-8 qt stand mixer bowl
Dough amount
1-1.5 kg/2.2-3.3 lb
11.4 L/12 qt commercial planetary mixer bowl
18.9 L/20 qt commercial planetary mixer bowl
spiral mixer / diving arm mixer/ fork mixer
1.5-2 kg/3.3-4.4 lb for most doughs;
1.5 kg/3.3 lb for stiff doughs like Brazilian
thin-crust pizza dough (maximum)
3-6 kg/6.6-13.2 lb
6-8 kg/13.2-17.6 lb
minimum amount depends on the bowl
capacity of the mixer; the bowl for our
spiral mixer has a 36 L/38 qt capacity;
8 kg/17.6 lb is the smallest amount we
mix in it, and 15 kg/33 lb is the maximum When using the double hydration method, it's especially
important not to overfill the mixer because the water can slosh
out while you are mixing the dough.
34 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Tips for Machine Mixing
Selecting a type of mixer isn't difficult once you
consider the cost, available space, quality requirements, and production needs. Because they're not
designed to run for long stretches of time, stand
mixers are mostly for home use and limited production in restaurants and pizzerias. They're quite
useful in those environments, eliminating a lot of
handwork. These machines have a relatively small
footprint, come with an array of attachments, and
are relatively economical.
Commercial planetary mixers are common in
restaurants and pizzerias; these workhorses are used
for many purposes, from mixing doughs to whipping
meringues to creaming butter to making cookie
dough. The efficiency of spiral mixers makes them a
top choice for mixing commercial-level quantities of
dough. The hook spins from the top of the machine,
and the bowl itself spins, too; the combined motion
results in the most friction on the dough, whichwill speed up gluten development. This reduces mixing
time, a plus for the pizza maker as well as the dough.
We mainly recommend spiral and commercial planetary mixers for restaurant and pizzeria use because
many home pizza makers won't need the commercialsized capacity of these larger machines. If home
pizza makers can fit them into the space and budget
of a home kitchen, though, the choice is theirs.
Make sure the amount of dough doesn't exceed
the amount we recommend based on the size of the
mixer you're using (see page 34 for weight ranges).
Consider weighing some ingredients directly into
the bowl for efficiency. Check to make sure the
mixer is set to low speed before turning it on. Switch
to medium speed if the recipe calls for it but not
until all the ingredients have formed ahomogeneous mass that stays securely in the bowl. Proceed with
the mixing instructions for the dough.
Most models of spiral mixers come with a wire
guard that will allow you to add ingredients
to the dough while the machine is running.
It won't prevent ingredients from flying out
of the mixer, however, so make sure not to
overload the bowl.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 35
6
COMMON MIXING PROBLEMS
Combining a few ingredients seems like a simple thing, but there are some challenges. Once
you understand what not to do, you'll also understand what sorts of things can go wrong.
UNDERMIXED
Undermixed dough won't fully hydrate
because the water is unevenly distributed.
Properly mixed dough should look homogeneous, with no noticeable clumps of flour or
pools of liquid.
DOUGH DRIED OUT
Dough exposed to the air will begin to dry on
the surface and form a skin. This reduces the
extensibility (stretch) of the dough, forcing it to
crack as it ferments or is manipulated. To avoid
this, keep the dough covered at all times. You
can use a slightly damp kitchen towel, a plastic
tarp, or even a large clean plastic trash bag to
protect your dough. If you're using a plastic
tub, cover it with a lid.
CLIMBING THE HOOK
This often happens if the mixer is left unattended. Stop the machine and push the dough
down the hook, then continue mixing.
OVERMIXING
If you've overmixed your dough-that is, if you've gone beyond full gluten development but the dough hasn't quite broken down-your dough
might be salvaged. For doughs raised with levain, simply let the dough
relax for a long time in the refrigerator. For yeast-raised doughs, it's a little
trickier because the yeast will continue to ferment the dough even in
the refrigerator. (This will occur in a levain-based dough as well, but to
a lesser extent.) If the dough is overmixed to the point that it's leaching
water and has become ropy, try this method: mix a half-batch of dough,
minus the salt. Allow your dough to autolyse for 20 minutes, then add
the salt. Add this new dough to the overmixed dough, mixing on low
speed until just combined. Proceed with bulk fermentation (if applicable); it may take longer than planned. The final pizza won't be exactly as
if you had mixed it correctly, but it will be close.
COMPLETE DISASTER
The only remedy for some mixing errors is to simply start over. Luckily,
dough ingredients are relatively inexpensive, and the mixing process is
fast enough that you'll probably still have time to make your pizza. Fatal
errors like these usually stem from human fallibility: the pizza maker
might have misread a measurement, transposed a number, or otherwise
strayed from the protocol. To avoid such mistakes, the first time you
make a recipe, check off each step when you complete it. At the very
least, this will show you later where you went wrong.
36 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Spiral Mixer
Spiral mixers have a reputation for being the most
efficient machines for mixing dough. Although spiral
mixers are not as common as planetary mixers in the
United States, these machines mix dough efficiently
without raising the temperature. Planetary mixers
create a lot of friction and can overheat your dough.
Although they involve an investment, we highly
recommend spiral mixers for restaurant and pizzeria
production. The only major drawback is that many
models are hard to clean because the bowl can't be
removed from the mixer.
Both the spiral hook that comes down from the
top of the machine and the bowl at the base spin.
Some have a spiral hook (also called a mixing blade)
and a bowl that spin in the same direction. Others
have a bowl that can be switched to spin in the
opposite direction, making for an even faster and
more efficient mix. Still others have more than one
spiral hook to simultaneously help mix. Most have
two mixing speeds; the first speed disperses the
ingredients and creates a uniform dough, and the
second develops the dough.
Countertop models can mix as little as 1 kg /2.2
lb, while the smallest floor models we've seen can
mix as little as 3.5 kg /7.7 lb. Some models can mix
up to a few hundred kilograms. Whatever the size,
they're versatile machines that operate on a simple
principle: two tools doing the job are better than one.
Commercial Planetary Mixer
The versatility of commercial planetary mixers means
that many restaurants and pizzerias rely heavily on
them, for everything from making dough to whipping
mass quantities of cream to grinding meat (given the
right attachments). Unlike the hook of a spiral mixer,
which spins along an axis, the attachment on a commercial planetary mixer spins in circles much like the
orbit of a planet around the sun. Double commercial
planetary models can mix hundreds of kilograms of
dough, using two spinning arms instead of one.
The smallest models have 11.4 L/12 qt bowls,
but many are designed to hold different-sized
bowls. For example, our mixer holds an 11.4L/
12 qt bowl (3–6 kg / 6.6–12.2 lb dough capacity)
and an 18.9 L/ 20 qt bowl (4-8 kg/ 8.8-17.6 lЫ
dough capacity). The small bowl can mix as little as
2.5-3 kg/5.1–6.6 b. Commercial planetary mixers
are easier to clean than spiral mixers because the
bowls are removable.
Most models have three speeds (low, medium,
and high); they also have attachments that can be
used for different mixing purposes. The hook attachment is used for pizza and bread doughs; the paddle
attachment is used for nonbread doughs such as
quick breads and cookies; and the whip attachment
is used to incorporate air into things like cake batters
or meringues.
There are simple versions and more advanced
mixers that feature jacketed bowls with double walls
Scrape down the sides of your mixer's
bowl as often as necessary during mixing to ensure that the ingredients are
evenly incorporated.
Planetary mixer
We saw an abundance of spiral mixers during
our travels to pizzerias in Europe but found
more planetary mixers being used when we
toured the United States.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 37
6
38
Twin-arm mixer
Fork mixer
Food processor
that contain circulating water. The temperature of
the water can be regulated, which gives you more
control over dough temperature.
Their smart design and flexibility make
commercial planetary mixers a good value, recommended for restaurant and pizzeria production.
They're sturdy and can be used for many years
with minimal maintenance.
Stand Mixer
The stand mixer is a small version of a commercial
planetary mixer that can comfortably sit on any work
surface, occupying minimal space. We recommend
these mixers for home use and small restaurant production. The pluses are clear: they're comparatively
economical; many small repair shops can fix broken
parts if needed; and they can perform various
functions besides mixing. Their manufacturers offer
many attachments (sold separately) that can use the
spinning motor to sheet pasta dough, grind meat,
mill grains into flour, and chop vegetables; these
attachments make the stand mixer a versatile tool.
The downside is that the motors of these machines
are often not powerful enough for some drier
doughs, and the dough capacity is relatively limited.
In addition to having the same mixing attachments as commercial planetary mixers (hook,
paddle, and whip), stand mixers have a broad range
of speed settings, from very slow to very fast. A hook
can take much of the manual labor out of mixing
to full gluten development. It works just fine on
sticky doughs (although you may need to scrape the
sides of the bowl periodically). The mixer can often
complete mixing without adding flour, which is
necessary when mixing by hand.
Twin-Arm or Diving Arm Mixer
Human arms are levers that turn in joints that don't
turn all the way around. When humans started making machines, including the first mechanical mixers,
they began with the idea of a wheel spinning around
a single axis. Those designs have since evolved, as we
see with the arms on this more complicated mixer.
It is still driven by a rotary motor, but it attempts to
approximate a gentle human touch while providing
the convenience of a machine. The arms work in
reciprocating fashion and fold ingredients from the
center to the outside of the mixing bowl (which
spins in some models).
Because this mixer is gentle on dough, it produces little friction, so it won't make the dough too
warm even if mixing to full gluten development.
This gentleness does have a negative side, though, in
that it can take a very long time to mix most doughs.
Small models can mix as little as 2.5 kg/ 5.5 lb,
though more typical sizes mix a minimum of 8 kg/
17.6 lb. These mixers are exceptional at incorporating inclusions and are popular among Italian bakers
for enriched doughs like panettone, but we also saw
them being used in many pizzerias.
Fork Mixer
The AVPN and many Neapolitan pizzaioli recommend this as the mixer for Neapolitan pizza dough.
It consists of a spinning bowl and a spinning twopronged "fork" that is set at an angle that matches
the incline of the side of the spinning bowl. They
vary in capacity ranging from machines that mix
4 kg/8.8 lb of dough all the way to 240 kg / 520 lb.
We tested all of our doughs in this mixer and found
that while it did the job in some cases and failed in
others (like focaccia), the mixer didn't work as well
with smaller or larger batches of dough. When we
put smaller batches of dough in the mixer, the fork
had a hard time catching the dough, so its motion
was wasted. This resulted in a long mixing time.
Additionally, it took an exceptionally long time to
mixhigh-hydration doughs.
Food Processor
The food processors common in home kitchens have
limited capacity and power, but sturdier Robot Coupe
models are standard equipment in many commercial
kitchens, ranging from countertop versions to an
industrial-sized model that can mix about 30 kg /
66 lb of dough. Whatever their size, the machines
work according to the same basic principle, which
involves blending the ingredients with a double blade
that spins at high speed (1,725 rpm for countertop
models and up to 3,600 rpm for industrial models).
This machine is not typically used to make pizza
dough, but it is quite able despite being somewhat
limited by bowl capacity. The bowl should be filled
only about halfway to give the blades room to
maneuver. Most home models can handle about a
kilogram of dough. The machine's blades spin much
faster than any of the mixers mentioned previously,
requiring only 45 seconds to 2 minutes to fully
develop a pizza dough. Because the mixing is fast, it's
wise to start with cold water (or other liquid) so as
not to overheat the dough. The machine forces the
water into the flour so quickly that gluten develops
almost instantly.
This is a convenient method, but it comes with a
trade-off: the pizza crusts tend to be tougher. That's
because the gluten has to be fully developed to form
a cohesive ball of dough in the mixer. Also, highhydration pizza and focaccia doughs don't work
well in a food processor.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EXPERIMENT
DOES THE MIXER MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
The mixing stage combines inert ingredients into a dynamic dough that
transforms into pizza. This process has fascinated pizza makers for ages
and has also produced a number of myths surrounding both hand mixing and machine mixing. There are theories that certain mixers influence
the way the final baked pizza comes out. Naturally, this made us curious
about whether the machine that you use actually makes a difference in
the final dough.
We got to work testing seven different master doughs (Brazilian thincrust, Neapolitan, artisan, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration
al taglio, and Detroit-style) using our five in-house mixers (stand, spiral,
diving arm, fork, and planetary). We mixed the following amounts of each
dough: 2 kg/4.4 lb in the stand mixer, 8 kg/17.6 lb in the spiral mixer,
4 kg/8.8 lb in the diving arm mixer, 10 kg/22 lb in the fork mixer, and
5 kg/11 lb in the 12 qt planetary mixer. For each test, the initial water
temperature was set to 21°C/70° F and, when the dough was mixed to
the desired stage, its final temperature was recorded. We also measured
the dough's extensibility on our extensograph at the same time we started
to shape the pizzas for baking. Once they were baked we scanned each
pizza (3 pizzas per type of mixer were measured for each dough) on a 3D
scanner and gathered quantitative data on their volume.
The Neapolitan pizza results are illustrated in the photos below.
Although different mixers required different dough amounts and
Neapolitan dough mixed 3 different ways
mixing times, and the temperatures after mixing were within 2-3
degrees of the desired dough temperature (see page 32), full gluten
development was achieved in all of the conditions, and the doughs
were similar in handling and by extensograph across the board. A
high-quality Neapolitan pizza resulted from all the mixers. While we
were working with our higher hydration doughs, however, the fork
mixer failed to properly mix doughs with 72 hydration or higher
(artisan, focaccia, New York square, and high-hydration al taglio). The
al taglio results are shown in the photos below. Note the difference in
volume for pizzas mixed with the fork mixer. For all the other mixers,
the dough handling for the al taglio was normal, and the crumb was
good across the board.
Different pizzerias have different mixers, and the pizzaioli have
learned how to use their machines to obtain their best possible pizza
doughs, sometimes using workarounds to overcome any faults or
shortcomings of their machines. This is why different pizzaioli will
defend or promote the use of a particular mixer; after all, it works very
well for them. But we will free you from the notion thata particular mixer is better with these results. Use any mixer you like, except the
fork mixer if you're mixing dough with more than 72 hydration. We
must also point out that no single factor makes a key difference when
making your dough (see page 396).
Stand
High-hydration al taglio dough mixed 3 different ways
Stand
Spiral Fork
Spiral Fork
These two graphs illustrate the force that it takes to stretch these specific master doughs. You'll notice that both mixers show the same trend-the lower the hydration, the more force it takes to mix
the dough. Our Brazilian thin-crust pizza, which has our lowest hydration (50.41 ), takes a factor of 3 to 4 times more force to mix than our focaccia dough, which clocks in at 86.87% hydration.
Spiral Mixer Stand Mixer
Force (g)
200 200
180 180
160 160
140 140
120
100
80 Force (g
120
100
80
60 60
40 40
20 20
o
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 20 40 60 80 100
Extensibility (mm) Extensibility (mm)
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
120
-Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough
-Neapolitan pizza dough
- Artisan pizza dough
- Focaccia dough
-New York square pizza dough
-High-hydration al taglio pizza dough
-Detroit-style pizza dough
39
6
HOW TO Mix with the van Over Method
Baker and cookbook author Charles van Over developed a mixing
method using the speed of food processor blades to very quickly
develop gluten (it was originally developed for bread but works for pizza
as well). The overall process is extremely fast: once all the water has been
added, it takes just 45 seconds to complete the mix.
Van Over's original method doesn't use a preferment, but that doesn't
mean that you can't use one. We have successfully mixed doughs with
preferments using this method, anda preferment can add flavor. Mixing
a dough for just 45 seconds, however, seems opposed, at least in spirit, to
the time and patiencea preferment requires to ripen. The food processor
recipes in the Pizza Dough Recipes chapter will fit in a standard food processor bowl, but they can be scaled up for larger quantities (see page 21).
Although this method has its limitations, we acknowledge that a
dough mixed in 45 seconds is remarkable and worthy of including; it
may be suited for specific environments and purposes (home baking,
some restaurants, and even large-scale industrial bakeries). The crust it
produces is attractive, but the crumb can be tight. (This method doesn't
work for higher-hydration pizza doughs, which take much longer to mix
because there isn't enough solid mass for the blades to quite catch the
dough. Instead, the blades move almost as if they were making their way
through a puree.)
The van Over method works in part because it uses the sides of the
food processor bowl as well as the lid to "throw" the dough around and
make the actual mixing more efficient. When a wet, loose batter-like
dough is in the processor, however, it doesn't quite form the strong
mass that's needed for it to be thrown around the bowl, which is what
happens with stiffer doughs. Additionally, the speed of the blades
cutting through the dough and mixing in air would cause the dough to
oxidize quickly.
Because the friction created inside the food processor bowl heats up
the dough considerably, water temperature is crucial here; this is one of
the rare circumstances where nonindustrial pizza makers should take the
time to calculate the water temperature. This precaution may still leave
your dough considerably warmer than those mixed in other ways.
1 Combine all the dry ingredients in the food
processor bowl.
To use the van Over method with a preferment,
you'll need to add it to the food processor bowl first,
along with the flour and salt. Pour the water in while
the machine is running. Stop once the dough has
formed a ball and check to ensure that it has been
mixed to full gluten development by performing the
windowpane test.
2 Turn the processor on, then pour in all the
water in a steady stream.
3
Process for 45 s.
4 If the gluten is not fully developed (it won't
hold a windowpane; see page 30), then
alternate between processing for 5 s and
testing the gluten development, until you
reach full gluten development.
Van Over method Traditional method
40 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Mix Using the Double Hydration Mixing Method
Highly hydrated doughs, such as focaccia, take a long time to develop in
a machine. The generous amount of water makes it difficult for the hook
on the mixer to catch the dough well, and it instead sloshes around in the
bowl. This issue can be remedied by adding the water to the mixer in two
steps rather than all at once.
1
Add 90%-95% of the water to the mixer's
bowl.
2 Add the remaining ingredients (except the
salt and remaining water) and mix on low
speed until you achieve a homogeneous
mass.
3 Allow your dough to autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stirthe salt into the remaining
water.
4 Turn the machine to low speed. Pour the
salt solution in a steady stream as the
machine mixes.
5 Mix to medium gluten development. Transfer to a lightly oiled plastic tub or bowl to
bulk ferment.
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158)
HOW TO Incorporate Inclusions by Machine
Using a mixer is dramatically faster than mixing by hand but requires
some care when incorporating inclusions into a dough. The solid matter
(your inclusion) is trying to bond with the dough; this can stress the
dough's strength and integrity as the inclusions pull and push through it.
Be careful to mix on the lowest speed to minimize damage. Mix until the
inclusions are incorporated into the dough; they will be enveloped in the
dough, not just hanging on to it.
1 Mix the dough to medium gluten
development.
2 Stop the machine and add all of the
inclusions.
3
2
Mix on low speed for 1-2 min, just until the
inclusions are evenly distributed throughout the dough and are completely
enveloped.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
4 Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled tub and
finish developing the gluten throughout
bulk fermentation by performing a series of
four-edge folds (see page 51) until it reaches
full gluten development.
41
6
HOW TO Make Compleat Wheat Dough
We developed this method to produce what is technically a 100
whole wheat dough without the dense, gummy texture you often get
from whole wheat flour. This allows for whole wheat flavor without the
volume-killing effects of the bran and germ.
To make whole wheat flour, commercial mills grind the wheat to a
fine powder and then remove the bran and germ, which is the same
process used to make white flour. The separated germ is toasted since its
oils can become rancid and then spoil the flour. The bran and germ are
then mixed back into the white flour. Our method also involves using
white flour and introducing the bran and germ back in when the dough
is halfway developed (medium gluten development) to get the flavor
benefits without the dense texture.
Beyond that, we toast the bran and germ to make them more flavorful and aromatic. It's like the difference between eating raw and toasted
almonds. This toasting also renders useless the enzymes that hinder
gluten development. And because bran and germ are notorious water
thieves (they suck water away from the dough and hold on to it, part of
the reason why whole wheat doughs feel dense), we presoak them so
they will have already absorbed all the water they need before being
mixed into the dough.
In the various compleat wheat recipes on pages 174-177, we have
calculated how much bran and germ each recipe needs in order to
mimic the percentages found in whole wheat flour. We opt to add the
soaked and toasted bran and germ to the flour used in the master recipe.
This will result in the highest possible volume and also the most flavorful
whole wheat crust you've tasted.
1
4
Toast the bran and germ in an even layer at
175°C/350° F in a home or deck oven. Do
not use a forced fan because it will blow
the bran and germ off the sheet pan. Toast
until aromatic, 5-7 min. Cool completely.
2 Mix with the water, and soak for at least
10 min (or up to 24 h).
4 With the machine stopped,add all of the
soaked/toasted bran and germ.
5 Mixon low speed for 1-2 min, just until the
bran and germ are evenly distributed and
are completely enveloped by the dough.
6 Transfer to a lightly oiled tub and finish
developing the gluten throughout bulk
fermentation by performing a series of
four-edge folds until the dough reaches full
gluten development.
42
Compleat Wheat Artisan Pizza Dough (see page 174)
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
3
Combine all of the dough ingredients
except for the soaked/toasted bran and
germ and mix to medium gluten
development.
Your Daily Pizza
Modern lifestyles don't always make it easy to produce our proverbial daily bread or, in this case, daily
pizza.We were inspired by an undemanding daily
baking routine created by Jeff Hertzberg and Zoë
François. Starting with 2007's Artisan Bread in Five
Minutes a Day, Hertzberg and François showcased a
make-ahead bread technique that became the centerpiece of a best-selling series of cookbooks. They
demonstrated how a large batch of dough for almost
any type of bread can be stored long-term in the
refrigerator, with the baker harvesting a loaf's worth
of dough every day for up to two weeks.
Hertzberg and François have refined their methods over time, and we have modified their recipe
HOW TO Make Your Daily Pizza
to make pizza dough with our own improvements
while keeping the low-maintenance schedule (see
recipes on page 184). We add around 0.221% ascorbic acid to strengthen the dough's gluten network
and reduce oxidation, which eventually would make
the dough turn gray in the refrigerator. Polydextrose
is included in our Neapolitan variation to produce a
very crispy crust.
If you have made your first large batch of dough,
you can harvest a 500 g / 1.1 lb (or 1 kg/2.2 lb)
piece, divide it (if necessary), preshape and shape
it, and then proof it. Accounting for proofing time,
the recipe takes more than 5 minutes of effort per
day,but with some preplanning this method supplies
daily pizza with a fraction of the work. Your Daily Artisan Pizza Dough
(see page 184)
1 Combine all of the ingredients in the mixer's bowl. Mix on low speed using a paddle
or hook attachment to a homogeneous
mass, 2-3 min. Transfer to a lightly oiled tub
and cover.
2 Bulk ferment for 1 h at 21°C/70° F. Remove
the lid and puta piece of plastic wrap
directly on the surface of the dough to
cover it completely. Refrigerate forat least
23 h before your first bake.
4 Proceed with the preshaping and shaping
instructions (if applicable) in the master
recipe.
5 Proof for 4/½-5/½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered.
If you are making Neapolitan pizza dough,
proof for 3-4 h at 21°C/70°F, covered.
Proceed with the shaping and baking
instructions in the master recipe.
3 Divide the dough as instructed in the master recipe.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 43
6
FACTORS THAT AFFECT MIXING TIME
The following table details factors that may affect mixing time and, therefore, your dough. Suggestions for eliminating (or minimizing) any negative
effects on your dough are also noted.
Factor
dough temperature
amount of dough in the mixer
type of flour
amount of water
fats
inclusions
How it can affect your dough
if the dough is too cold when it comes out of the mixer,
it will take longer to ferment than a dough that comes
out at our recommended range of 24-25°C/75-78°F;
a dough that comes out too hot (generally 27° C/80°F
and above) will hydrate faster and therefore proof
faster, which will affect its flavor and make it harder to
handle; warmer doughs are desirable in some cases,
such as our Neapolitan pizza dough with poolish and
our master Neapolitan pizza dough
too much dough will take longer to mix and increase
mixer friction, and too little won't mix well or at all
some flours, such as whole wheat, contain bran, which
can rip the dough; stronger flours take longer to mix;
low-gluten flours mix quickly and can break down
just as fast; rye flours, in addition to being low gluten,
absorb more water than regular wheat flours
high-hydration doughs take a long time to mix; lowhydration doughs are hard to mix because they're stiff
and can bog down the machine
How to keep it from affecting your dough
for cold dough, adapt your schedule to compensate for
the difference in fermenting time; to fix hot dough, put
it on a floured sheet pan or in a large tub, and use your
hands to flatten it as much as possible; cover it with
plastic wrap sheet (or a clean plastic bag), and refrigerate it for at least 10-15 min or until the dough has
reached the recommended temperature range
know the capacity of your mixer and don't overload or
underload it; for more on mixer capacity, see page 34
understand how each flour is used for different purposes, and choose the flour that's best for the dough
you want to make
for high-hydration doughs, use the double hydration
method (see page 41); for dry, stiff doughs, mix on the
lowest speed and/or usea paddle attachment instead
of a hook
fats slow down gluten formation and interfere with the when possible, add high-fat ingredients after the
bonds that keep gluten together, by coating them and dough has reached at least low gluten development
preventing them from hydrating
as with bran, solid inclusions such as nuts and fruit can
rip the dough
add solid inclusions after the dough has reached
medium gluten development (see page 30)
HAND MIXING
Mixing by hand is the original method for making
dough, whether bread or pizza. These days, there
are a number of hand-mixing methods, each with
pros and cons. To be clear, we're not proponents
of mixing pizza dough by hand. We prefer machine
mixing because most pizza doughs need to be mixed
to full gluten development, and letting machines
do the work makes sense for both home cooks and
pros.We recommend to mix by hand only ifyou
don't have an electric mixer, although mixing a few
batches of dough by hand will give you a feel for how
the dough comes together at different points in the
mixing process.
The hand-mixing technique you choose ultimately has to do with how much effort you're willing
to commit, how much time you have, and how dirty
you're willing to get. When we say hand mixing, we
really mean hands, not a wooden spoon or rubber
spatula. The tactile connection lets you feel any
changes in the dough immediately, such as whether
it's becoming cohesive or is still lumpy. You can learn
a lot about the dough through direct contact, and
then can adjust your efforts accordingly.
Hand mixing is gentlest on the dough, preserving
the carotenoids that will give it a creamy yellow hue,
if that is something that matters to you (it has no
effect on flavor or final texture). The process is all
about practice and patience. Batch size is the main
limitation, but you can make a batch that weighs
anywhere from 1 kg to 10 kg/ 2.2 lb to 22 lb (some
pizzerias mix up to 40 kg / 88 lb by hand).
Still, you may have to work on your stamina and
upper body strength if you want to mix large quantities on a regular basis.
If you use bulk fermentation and dough folding to
develop gluten strength, the effort is minimal as long
as you perform the folds correctly. The initial dough
is mixed to a shaggy mass (by hand) and then the
dough is developed during bulk fermentation through
a series offolds; alternatively you can mix further by
hand to a more developed dough and then finish with
fewer folds and a shorter bulk fermentation.
As your hands mix the dough, you're essentially
forcing the hydration of the flour by "pushing" the
water into it. Every hand motion helps make this
happen, little by little. Your hands won't produce
the same amount of frictional heat that a machine
does-not by a long shot. That's why the DDT
doesn't apply at all here. Instead, you must take the
ambient temperature into consideration. The goal
is to have a constant working dough temperature
that's neither too cold nor too hot. If the room is
hot (e.g., 27°C / 80°F), start with cold water or
lukewarm (15°C/ 60°F); if the room is cold (e.g.,
15°C/60°F), start with warm water (24-26°C/
75-79° F). If you're working in a room that's temperature controlled, your flour (and preferment, if
you're using one) will be at room temperature. As
a rule of thumb, you should start with water that's
about 21°C / 70° F, assuming that's the approximate
VERACE PIZZA
Wooden proofing boxes are commonly found
in pizzerias: the AVPN (see page 1:74) also
offers a wooden mixing box for hand mixing
your dough.
The action of hand mixing is gentler on the
dough and will provide less friction, but it
takes much longer. Some doughs, like our
master Focaccia Dough (see page 148), should
be mixed by machine only.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 45
HOW TO Mix in a Bowl
temperature of your kitchen. If you aren't sure what
your room temperature is and you don't have a thermometer, it's a safe bet to start with water that feels
just cool to the touch.
As for getting your hands "dirty," for some methods you'll have to use only one hand for mixing. We
recommend you keep one hand in the dough and the
other one clean. Your clean hand will be the one you
use to grab a scraper to clean your dough-mixing
hand, to hold your mixing bowl, and any number of
other one-handed tasks. For some methods, you'll
need two hands. The good news is, using two hands
makes mixing faster-albeit messier.
Our preferred method entails mixing doughin a
bowl and then transferring it directly to a table. In this
This is our preferred method for mixing a dough by hand. This is the most
basic method for mixing dough: it involves using only a bowl and your
case, we suggest using a marble surface or wooden
table; if you don't have the latter, use a custom-cut
piece of untreated plywood or even a large wooden
cutting board. You shouldn't use the same cutting
board that you use for preparing other food because
it can give an off-flavor to the dough. If the dough sits
on marble for too long, it can have an impact on the
temperature. Keep in mind that marble is at the same
temperature as its environment even though it is cool
to the touch. It can only raise or lower the dough's
temperature to bring it into equilibrium with it. We
don't like stainless steel as a work surface because
tends to stain dough with gray or black streaks. Granite orcomposite granite are also good for pizza dough
but are more expensive than wood.
hands. Spoons or spatulas can't get into the dough as well to distribute
the ingredients evenly.
2
1
Combine the water and yeast in a bowl.
Whisk to dissolve the yeast. If you're using
a preferment, dissolve it in the water.
A ripe preferment will float in the water. For more on
preferments, see page 1:301.
2 Pour the flour and salt on top of the water
and yeast mixture, and begin to stir with
your fingertips, then with your hands.
3 Mix until you achieve a shaggy mass.
4 Turm the dough onto awooden or marble
worktable (scrape the bowl clean with a
bench scraper). Knead the dough with
both hands until you reach medium gluten
development (perform the windowpane
test to make sure; see page 30). If you wish
to, you can mix to full gluten development
by hand and skip to step 8.
5 Clean your hands well, scraping off the
excess dough with the bench scraper.
Lightly oil a rectangular or square plastic
tub.
6 Transfer the dough to the tub and immediately perform a four-edge fold in it.
Typically with this method, you'll have to bulk ferment for 2-2½ hours and perform a total of four to
seven four-edge folds at 30-minute intervals.
기 Rest the dough for 30 min and perform the
second four-edge fold; repeat this step
until the dough reaches full gluten development. Perform the windowpane test
(see page 30) to make sure.
8 Rest the dough for 20-30 min after the last
fold before dividing.
46 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Mix with the No-Knead Method
Jim Lahey, renowned baker and cookbook author, popularized this
revolutionary technique. It reinforces the idea that when ingredients
are combined and left alone, they'll do what's in their nature and produce a great pizza (see the recipes on page 182). Calling this technique
"no-knead" isn't entirely true; there's some manipulation involved, but
the handling is much less than a typical dough requires. This dough relies
on time-and the pizza maker's patience-to do the work that your hands
would usually tackle.
1 Combine the ingredients in a bowl and mix
by hand to a homogeneous mass. Transfer
to a lightly oiled tub, and cover.
2 Bulk ferment for 12-18 h at 21°C/70°F.
3 Divide and preshape the dough as
instructed in the master recipe.
5 Proceed with the shaping and baking
instructions in the master recipe. If you are
making New York pizza dough, proof for
41/2-512 h at 21°C/70°F.
We don't recommend this method for our panbaked pizzas since the dough doesn't get as strong as
we like. We had to degas it too much in order to get
the dough to fill the pan.
HAND MIXING IN WOODEN TUBS
A madia is the traditional Neapolitan wooden tub used for mixing
dough by hand. They come in a number of sizes. These days,
however, they're harder to find because many were replaced
once electric mixers became available (or affordable). During
our travels, we did find someone who actually still uses them.
Renowned pizzaiolo Franco Pepe (of Pepe in Grani in Caiazzo, in
the province of Caserta, Italy) mixes all of his dough by hand in
these wooden tubs.
You can imagine the amount of work it takes to mix all of the
doughs thatare made in his restaurant-notjust the sheer quantity
of dough, but the physical effort it takes to accomplish this feat on
a daily basis. But it's an integral part of his pizza-making process.
Some see the hand mixing at Pepe in Grani and think, aha! This
must be the secret to his fabulous pizza! But that's not the secret at
all. Franco Pepe's success came because he's very good at making
pizza, has had many years of practice, and has come up with a
mixing method that can be effectively taught to his team through
hands-on training focused on time, temperature, and the types of
flour used in his pizzas.
There's no real evidence that mixing by hand has any major positive effect on dough, whether in a wooden tub or otherwise. You
might think there's some magical stuff happening in the wood with
yeast and bacteria, giving the dough special qualities that plastic
and metaljust can't provide (although the wooden box is porous
and can absorb some moisture from the dough). This is part of
the lore of pizza making. But there's no special sorcery to wooden
tubs. There is just skill.
4
Proof for 3-4 h at 21° C/70°F, covered.
Optional: After preshaping, you can also
cold-proofthis dough at 4°C/39° F for 1-2
d for even better baking results. Ifyou coldproof the dough, remove it from refrigeration 1/2-2 h before baking so it warms up
and is easier to stretch out.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 47
6
Folding during bulk fermentation redistributes
the yeast and carbon dioxide in the dough as
well as evens out the temperature of the dough.
48
BULK FERMENTATION
When making some of our doughs, such as our
Focaccia Dough (see page 148) and New York
Square Pizza Dough (see page 152), the mixing
stage is followed by bulk fermentation, also known
as first proof or first fermentation. You are simply
fermenting your dough at room temperature in
one piece before dividing it into smaller portions.
The duration of bulk fermentation is most often
determined by three factors: how long the dough
was mixed, the consistency of the dough, and the
type of yeast (commercial, levain, or a combination)
used. The bulk fermentation stage is standard in
bread baking but far less common among pizzaioli,
who tend to go straight from mixing their dough to
balling it for the fermentation stage.
We include the bulk fermentation stage for
our Neapolitan dough and for our bread-like
pizzas. Neapolitan dough is not traditionally bulk
fermented, but after extensive testing for the best
method to proof our master Neapolitan dough (see
page 124), we found it gave us the best results.
The amount of mixing time is generally inversely
proportional to the duration of bulk fermentation.
That is, the longer the mix (the more the gluten
is developed), the shorter the bulk ferment; the
shorter the mix, the longer the bulk ferment. The
dough is developed during bulk fermentation
through a series of folds (see page 50). The duration
matters because it allows time for enzymatic activity
and hydration to develop gluten; this happens
when the gluten strands organize and through the
acidification that occurs during a long fermentation.
Acidity helps strengthen gluten strands, whether
naturally produced by the yeast (commercial or
wild) or added in the form of ascorbic acid during
mixing (see page 1:324).
Note that the majority of our doughs are not
bulk fermented. Instead, they're mixed to full gluten
development and then go through what's called
bench rest. This 15- to 20-minute rest period after
mixing allows the dough to relax before dividing
and preshaping. Our master Neapolitan dough is an
outlier in that it's mixed to full gluten development
and allowed to bulk ferment at room temperature in
a tub for 20-24 hours.
We bulk ferment any doughs that are mixed to
medium gluten development, including those that
have an inclusion. We incorporate inclusions at the
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
medium gluten development stage (see page 30)
because if the gluten is fully developed, the dough
will be too strong to easily take in the inclusion,
which might cause tearing. Adding the inclusions at
this halfway point is much gentler on the dough. We
finish developing the dough during bulk fermentation through a series of gentle four-edge folds (see
page 51).
THE BENEFITS OF BULK
FERMENTING
Bulk fermentation allows the dough to rest after
mixing, which gives the enzymes enough time to
act on the components ofthe dough. Proteases
(protein-eating enzymes) cut gluten strands into
smaller strands by breaking down the peptide bonds
between amino acid chains in the proteins. The act of
mixing and folding strengthens these strands even as
they get smaller and smaller because the latticework
ofthe gluten network becomes more interconnected.
The gluten will eventually form a network of chains
and strands that become the structure of the dough.
Protease is found in very small amounts; an excess
ofit would cut gluten strands too much and have the
opposite effect. If the dough is allowed to autolyse
(see page 32) or if a preferment is used, proteases will
have enough time to do their work. Bulk fermentation
gives these enzymes even more time. It strengthens
the dough slowly and gradually without adding excessive oxygen as with long mixing times.
FACTORS THAT AFFECT BULK
FERMENTATION
Multiple factors influence the time the dough spends
bulk fermenting at room temperature, including
dough hydration, mixing method, temperature
and humidity, and yeast type. High-hydration
doughs require a longer bulk fermentation time and
additional folds; this allows time for the gluten to
form a firm structure in what is a very slack dough.
A dough mixed by hand will require a longer bulk
fermentation time and more folds to strengthen its
gluten structure than a dough mixed by machine
to medium gluten development. Doughs that are
machine-mixed to low gluten development will also
require more time to bulk ferment and an increased
number of folds.
The warmer the room, the faster the dough will
ferment. For most doughs, try to maintain a cool
environment (approximately 21°C/ 70°F). If you're
unsure, it's always best to err on the side of caution
and go with a cooler temperature. Maintaining
a consistent temperature is also an important
consideration, as temperature fluctuations during
bulk fermentation can impact the duration. Some
kitchens have access to a proofer (see page 74),
which allow you to bulk ferment your dough at a
specific, consistent temperature. If you have a temperature-controlled pizzeria, however, you might not
need a proofer-retarder.
A dough that contains commercial yeast will
ferment much faster than a dough that contains only
levain. In theory, a dough made with commercial
yeast should generally be bulk fermented for a relatively short time compared to a levain-based dough,
which benefits from a long bulk ferment and multiple
folds. We say "in theory" because you can simply
reduce the amount of commercial yeast in your dough
and extend bulk fermentation time. This is key for
high-hydration doughs that are mixed by hand.
STRATEGIES FOR BULK FERMENTATION
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
(see page 124)
Type of mix Length of bulk
fermentation
medium gluten develop- 2-2/½ h
ment
Number of four-edge folds
(unless noted in the recipe)
4-6
full gluten development the dough is bench
rested instead for
15-20 min before dividing
0
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Recommended doughs
focaccia dough
New York square pizza
dough
high-hydration al taglio
pizza dough
all doughs with inclusions
thin-crust pizza dough
Brazilian thin-crust pizza
dough
deep-dish pizza dough
Neapolitan pizza dough
New York pizza dough
artisan pizza dough
Detroit-style pizza dough
Doughs not recommended
thin-crust pizza dough
Brazilian thin-crust pizza
dough
deep-dish pizza dough
Neapolitan pizza dough
New York pizza dough
artisan pizza dough
Detroit-style pizza dough
New York square pizza
dough
high-hydration al taglio
pizza dough
foccacia dough
49
6
When we call for a dough to be folded, we
are talking about four-edge folds the majority
the time. There are times, however, when
we instead recommend a simple book fold.
In those cases, just fold the dough in half as
though shutting an open book.
FOLDING
During bulk fermentation, folding is often performed. This strengthens the dough because the
stretching breaks down weak gluten bonds and
allows stronger ones to form. The gluten strands
organize and align, which gives the dough the integrity to become elastic and expand as carbon dioxide
(produced by the yeast) and water vapor are introduced into the bubbles. Folding gives the carbon
dioxide and water vapor more "housing" to create
larger bubbles throughout the dough. The more
folds performed on the dough, the more bubbles
that form-and the more those bubbles will be able
to expand and create a better alveoli pattern in the
crumb. Keep in mind that folding breaks up the large
bubbles into smaller ones; with some doughs, such
as focaccia, you want to keep those large bubbles
so you get an open crumb, so be gentle when you
perform folds.
Some of the initial carbon dioxide bubbles deflate
during bulk fermentation, and the gas escapes from
the dough. If the yeast is surrounded by a carbon
dioxide-saturated environment, it will affect the
yeast's physical and chemical properties. Folding
restarts the fermentation process, allowing the
dough to rise again. This extends fermentation time,
which results in better formation of gluten structure
as well as more pronounced flavors.
In addition to encouraging an even gluten
network, folding equalizes the temperature of the
dough throughout its mass. As dough sits, the core
often becomes warmer than the surface. Folding the
dough onto itself ensures consistent fermentation
throughout. Folding also redistributes unreacted
sugars, making them more readily available for yeasts
to eat, which extends fermentation time. Yeasts and
bacteria are also redistributed.
50 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
As a general rule, the less you mix a dough, the
greater number of folds you'll need to develop the
gluten. For pizza doughs mixed to medium gluten
development, perform four to six four-edge folds.
Doughs mixed to low gluten development can have
up to eight folds or even more. Since there is less
gluten development in doughs mixed to medium
gluten development, the doughs rely on a high number of folds. For most of our doughs that are mixed
to medium gluten development, we recommend
HOW TO Perform a Four-Edge Fold
2-21½ hours to bulk ferment with a total of four to
five folds. The first fold should happen as soon as
the dough is placed in the tub (in our recipes, this is
part of the mixing steps) and the remaining folds at
half-hour intervals after that. Doughs mixed to full
gluten development in the mixer do not need any
folds or bulk fermentation time-with one exception:
Neapolitan pizza dough, which is mixed to full gluten
development and bulk fermented, without any folds ПРЕМИУМ БИБЛИОТЕКИ
for 20-24 hours.
This is a crucial technique to master. Executing it properly will give the
dough structure to hold its shape and expand evenly in the oven. Proper
folding strengthens the dough and helps give the gluten network an
БАЗ
BF
organized pattern, and it improves fermentation by evening out the temperature of the dough.
1
2
Transfer the mixed dough to a lightly oiled
plastic tub, perform a four-edge fold, and
cover it with an airtight lid.
Lightly moisten your hands or coat them
with a thin layer of oil to prevent the dough
from sticking.
5 Lift up the end that is closest to you, and
then fold it away from you so that it meets
the end of the dough that's farthest from
you.
3 Pull up the right side of the dough and fold
it over to the left side of the tub.
4
6 Lift up the end that's farthest from you, and
then pull it toward you. Some bakers then
flip the dough over so that the seam is
underneath. If you are working with a drier
dough, seal the seam to create a more
uniform shape, since it lacks the moisture
content needed forthis to occur naturally.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
7
Pull the left side of the dough up and over
to the right side of the tub.
Place the lid on the tub, and continue to
bulk ferment.
51
6
DIVIDING AND PRESHAPING
Immediately following bulk fermentation or a
short bench rest after mixing, the dough is typically
divided; before you proceed, however, you must
make sure your dough is ready for preshaping.
The dough should be supple and relaxed. If you
developed your dough utilizing folds during bulk
fermentation, such as with New York square pizza
or focaccia, perform the windowpane test (see page
30). If the dough doesn't hold a windowpane, the
structure won't be elastic enough and the dough will
tear when it's pulled. If this happens, perform one or
more additional four-edge folds and extend the bulk
fermentation time. If the dough hasn't yet developed
a strong structure but also feels gassy and you're
concerned it will proof too much in the final proofing
stage, perform a four-edge fold and then refrigerate.
Continue bulk fermentation until the dough has
developed enough gluten to become fully elastic.
Once the dough is strong enough to divide (and
thus ready to preshape),you'll essentially be cutting
a large piece of dough into smaller pieces. This step
has numerous approaches, but the goal is always to
divide the dough into equal pieces. Seems pretty
straightforward, right? But as with so many things
in life, our first attempts at a new skill can be a little
rough. That's why we've simplified the steps in a
way that will help whether it's your first or your
thousandth pizza.
First, consider the shape of the pizza you want to
make. This will determine how you begin to portion
the dough. Ifyou're making al taglio pizzas, for
example, you'll need short rectangles; for Neapolitan
pizzas, you will cut out squares. Make sure there's
enough room on your work surface to hold the
dough and the divided pieces. Be sure to use bench
flour (see page 53) or semolina on your table. Very
wet doughs require more care and attention since
they stick to everything they touch (see page 59). If
your dough has a significant amount of commercial
yeast, you'll need to work quickly so it doesn't begin
to proof too much before you start shaping it. (Some
fermentation will inevitably occur, cur, but you want to
keep that to a minimum and let the yeast proof after
the dough is preshaped.) Levain-based doughs are
more tolerant.
A scale will make your life easier by allowing you
to ensure that your pieces of dough are the same
size. If the weighing surface is too small to hold the
dough, put a sheet pan oror a plate on top of the scale.
Be sure to account for the weight of the container by
zeroing the scale first.
Practice will help you then shape the dough
as evenly as possible and minimize the amount of
movements you need to make. There are many ways to
preshape and then shape dough (see page 3:3 for the
various methods). Try several, and see which one you
prefer. The obvious reason for shaping dough is to create a uniform, round, square, oval, or rectangular pizza.
A uniform shape will promote consistently distributed
tension, which helps the dough expand evenly.
THE WORKSTATION
Setting up your workstation properly will make
your dividing and preshaping tasks go more
smoothly. The surface that you divide and shape
your dough on matters. Stainless steel isn't terrible
for working with dough, but wood and marble (or
granite) are better. Why? Because the dough will
slide over wood and marble surfaces more cleanly
than stainless steel, which also tends to stain the
dough a grayish black. Wood is cheaper than
marble or other surface stones. If you're baking
pizza at home and don't feel sure about investing
in a wooden table or workbench for your kitchen,
simply have a piece of untreated plywood cut to
the desired size. The custom-cut plywood can be
tucked away when you're not using it.
We recommend a 1 m / 3 ft square of plywood
with a standard thickness of 1.25 cm /1/½ in because
this will suit most of your dough-shaping needs. You
can also make your surface smaller-say, 60 cm/2 ft
square, especially if you find the larger board too
heavy to lift. Use a paper towel in a rubbing motion to
coat the board with a layer of food-grade mineral oil.
Repeat this process as needed to maintain the wooden
surface and let it sit for 24 hours before use. Before
dividing the dough, place a rubber grip mat on your
work surface, and then position the wooden board on
top of it. Don't use a damp towel or anything wet to
keep the board in place; this will cause warping. Each
time you prepare to use the plywood board, wipe
the surface clean with a lightly dampened towel to
remove dust; don't wash the plywood because it will
warp if it gets too wet.
You'll need flour for dusting for shaping most
doughs. Before you begin, make our recommended
bench flour by mixing equal parts rice and bread
flours. We include rice flour in the mixture because
it doesn't absorb as much moisture as bread flour
and thus helps prevent wet doughs from sticking
to most surfaces. We mix the rice flour with bread
flour because we don't want the baked pizza to take
on any of the rice flavor. As an alternative to this
mixture, you can use fine semolina, which works
great as dusting flour.
Use a sifter or your hand to dust your work surface and containers with the bench flour. We prefer a
sifter.Although sifting may seem inefficient because
it takes longer than hand-dusting, it's the best way
to distribute an even layer. If you're dusting by hand,
simply toss the flour on in an even layer. Use just
enough to keep the dough from actually touching
the work surface.
Before you begin preshaping and shaping, gather
the following items: bench flour (see above), a
scale, water or a water spritzer, a sifter, a bench or
pastry brush, a bench knife, a plastic bag or tarp, a
timer, and the container or surface where the shaped
dough will proof (see page 66). Depending on the
dough, this container or surface will be left as is,
floured, or oiled.
We suggest keeping water handy in case your
dough is sliding around because there's too much
Some pizzerias preshape their dough as they
divide, it while others divide all of the dough
first and then preshape it.
6
Ifyou divide your dough and it isn't the correct
weight, either trim it down to size or add small
pieces to make it right. Place the small pieces
on top (don't stack them) and then fold them
in when you flip the dough over to preshape it.
IImulino DI N
flour on your worktable. Use the water judiciously
to give your hands and the dough more traction; too
much will also make it slide. Use a sifter to disperse
the bench flour evenly around the table so the dough
doesn't stick. Use the bench or pastry brush to dust
off excess flour. The bench knife will help you pick
up and move dough pieces as well as clean the table.
Make sure the plastic bag or tarp is large enough to
cover all your dough pieces so they don't dry out and
form a skin. The timer will help you keep track of
how long your dough is resting and when to perform
the next steps.
DIVIDING TIPS
Dividing a dough evenly will help ensure all of the
pieces proofand bake at the same rate. Whether
you're dividing 1 kg or 10 kg / 2.2 lb or 22 lb, the
same guidelines apply. You should divide and shape
your dough on a smooth surface so that flour or bits
of dough don't get trapped in any nicks or pockets.
Give yourself enough room for your ball of dough,
a scale, and the divided pieces of dough, as shown
in the photo on the next page. Right-handed people
should put the scale on the left (and vice versa for
lefties) to reduce crossover and increase efficiency of
motion. Prepare your work surface by dusting it with
flour or coating it with oil, depending on the type of
dough you are working with. You can also dust the
top of the dough with flour or coat it with oil before
turning the dough out of the tub. When you remove
the dough from its tub, it should ideally retain the
rectangular shape of the container so that it will be
easier to divide into squares or rectangles. Divide
by using a bench knife to cut cleanly through the
dough, taking care not to tear it. Try to divide the
dough using as few cuts as possible.
54 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
If your dough is uneven when you take it out of
the tub, simply fold the dough in half and press
it to even it out.
HOW TO Divide and Weigh Your Dough
The most common method of dividing dough used by both home pizza
makers and professionals requires only two pieces of equipment: a
bench knife and a scale. That makes it economical. More importantly, it's
also the most accurate, since the scale will ensure that you divide into
equal pieces. Measuring dough by volume just doesn't work. Precision
and efficiency become even more important as your output increases
because the dividing-and-weighing process will naturally take more time
overall.
We prefer to use a square or rectangular tub for storing dough
because most doughs with 270 hydration will take the tub's shape
once they've settled. For easier handling, we also suggest lightly oiling
the inside of any storage container. The square or rectangular shape also
2
makes it easier to divide the dough into equal pieces after it's turned out
onto a lightly floured surface.
It's important for the dough to be relatively flat and uniformly thicklarge variations will make it hard to divide evenly. You can pat the dough
to make the thickness even. If the rectangle is very uneven in thickness,
the best way to even it out is to fold it over onto itself and let it rest, covered, for 30 more minutes before dividing.
The part of the dough that's in contact with the work surface is the
smoothest (the most uniform). Keep this smooth side facing the worktable until you're ready to preshape, at which time you will turn the
dough over. Work with a clean, sharp bench knife because it will cut your
dough rather than tear it. Have your scale handy.
1
If using a tub, transferthe dough to a lightly
floured surface, handling it gently so that it
retains the shape of its container.
2 Mentally assess how you'lldivide the
dough.
3 Use your bench knife to cut cleanly through
the dough, all the way to the work surface.
(Don't worry if the dough degasses when
you cut through it; that's not uncommon
and you may be flattening the pizza dough
anyway.)
4 Weigh each piece of dough. Reserve one of
the small pieces of dough from which you
can harvest in case any of your divided
portions come out too small (or use the
excess dough if one of the main pieces was
too heavy). Don't stack the extra pieces on
top of each other; spread them out.
5 Keep track of the order in which you cut
and weigh all the pieces of dough. You'll
eventuallywant to shape each piece in the
order that you cut it.
6 Cover your dough with a clean plastic bag
or tarp so it doesn't form a skin.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 55
6
DIVIDING BASICS
Lightly coat your surface with an even layer
of flour, using a sifter or your hand.
Use a bench knife or a sturdy bowl scraper
to cut cleanly through the dough.
Don't use your hands to divide the dough
because it will likely tear, which could degas
and damage its structure.
HOW TO Divide the Dough Without a Scale
At Modernist Cuisine, we're decidedly pro-scale. We highly recommend using this handy little device when dividing your dough. Unless
you've divided and made thousands and thousands of pizzas and know
your dough inside and out, the eyeball method isn't going to yield great
results. Without a scale, you risk cutting uneven portions, which will
require different amounts of time for proofing and baking. But if you
don't have a scale at home or your trusted scale stops working during
dough prep, follow these instructions.
2
1 If using a tub, transfer the dough to a lightly
floured surface, handling it gently so that it
retains the shape of its container.
2 Reshape the dough into a rectangle if it's
lost some of its form.
3 Make sure the dough has a uniform
thickness. If not, gently fold it in half
(see page 55).
56
5a 5b
4 Mentally divide the dough into the number
of pieces you need. In the photo above,
we've made a triple batch (3 kg/6.6 lb) of
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 110). We
plan to use it to make a dozen pizzas, so we
will visualize a 4-by-3 grid.
5 Once you have an idea of where you're
going to cut, use a sharp bench knife and
cut cleanly all the way through the dough
until you can feel your work surface
beneath it.
6 Cover your dough with a clean plastic bag
or tarp so it doesn't form a skin.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PRESHAPING
There are two steps that fall under the rubric of
shaping: preshaping and shaping. Shaping is the step
when you turn your piece of dough into the shape
you want your final pizza to be, such as a round
Neapolitan. We cover how to shape our master
doughs in the Iconic Pizza chapter starting on page
3:3. Preshaping comes before that. It establishes a
preliminary form that gives the dough a framework
from which the tension and gluten will expand. This
initial tension comes from folding and tucking the
dough under and stretching it into place. The steps
of preshaping vary depending on the style of pizza.
Proper preshaping leads to evenly risen and
baked pizzas. It provides the foundation for optimal
crust and crumb formation. The practical goals of
preshaping are to degas the dough and to make it
stronger by producing tension. You're essentially
accomplishing something similar to when you perform folds during bulk fermentation (see page 50).
The carbon dioxide bubbles become redistributed
while the gluten strands tighten and reorganize. The
even dispersion ofcarbon dioxide bubbles throughout the dough creates more spaces in which the gas
can expand, resulting in the big, open crumb structure we prefer in certain pizzas. (For medium-crust
and bread-like pizzas, avoid degassing the dough too
much, which could lead to the tight, even crumb that
is commonly seen in frozen pizza.)
Prehaping dough is a bit like making a bed. It's
not just a matter of getting things in the right place;
you want to get the tension right, too. Tension is
what maintains the shape through final proofing.
Just as with sheets tucked around a mattress, the
tension comes from pulling the dough taut and folding in the corners. Most of the preshaping processes
detailed in the pages that follow apply to doughs
that aren't considered high-hydration. The steps
aren't necessary with wetter doughs such as our
focaccia. Although they're difficult to handle, those
slack doughs require fewer steps to become finished
baked pizzas than some firmer doughs do. On page
59, we provide several tips for the few high-hydration doughs that need to be shaped.
For most thin- and medium-crust pizzas, such
as New York pizzas, the dough is preshaped into
balls, which are placed ona sheet pan or in a tub,
well covered, and then allowed to ferment. The fermentation time can range from a few hours at room
temperature to 24–48 hours or more in refrigeration.
When they're ready, they're shaped, sauced, topped,
and baked. For these pizzas, preshaping and shaping
are very distinct steps.
For pan-baked pizzas, the dough is preshaped by
coaxing it to start to fill the pan after bulk fermentation or bench resting; that's occasionally followed
by a resting period of 30 minutes. During this time,
the dough relaxes. Once the dough has rested, it can
be further extended to fill the pan, then proofed,
stippled, sauced, topped, and baked.
Our Neapolitan dough is a unique case. We preshape it after a long room-temperature bulk fermentation (20-24 hours); this produces a very strong
dough, which needs at least 3 hours of rest before
it's shaped for baking. For all pizzas, preshaping
properly and evenly is important because it ineans
all of the newly aligned gluten strands will carry the
same burden of expansion.
With some doughs, like Neapolitan
pizza dough, flouring the surface is not
necessary during dividing, preshaping,
and shaping.
For doughs preshaped into a boule, it's important to have a smooth surface and a tight seam
to allow for even expansion during proofing.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 57
6
For pan-baked pizzas, you'lloften
have to let the dough rest again after
the initial stretch since it may not have
reached all of the corners of the pan.
Keep it covered and let it relax in intervals of 15-30 minutes before trying to
stretch it again. Don't force the dough
so much that it rips.
Organizing the Preshaping Process
Using the basic dough preshapes (ball and bâtard)
as a starting point, you can make adjustments and
achieve many variations. Regardless of which shape
you choose, we recommend the first in, first out
(FIFO) method when proceeding from dividing
to preshaping and then to shaping dough (see
page 3:3).
As you preshape the pieces, place them back on
the worktable in a way that makes it easy for you to
remember the order in which you worked them. The
first piece of dough that you divided will be the first
that you preshape; the last piece of dough that you
divided will be the last that you preshape.
HOW TO Use the First In, First Out (FIFO) Method
We proceed from left to right for dividing and preshaping the dough
pieces, with the newest ones closest and the oldest ones farthest out.
With that approach, once the preshaped pieces have finished bench
resting for 15-20 minutes, we shape them from oldest to newest, positioning them with the first shaped pieces closest and the recently shaped
The same pattern applies later to shaping the
dough if it is in the category of shaping before
proofing, like our bread-like pizzas (for these pizzas,
make sure that your pans are prepped before you
start preshaping). The other category is proofed in
balls and shaped just before baking, like Neapolitan,
New York, thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, artisan, or
deep-dish pizzas.
This approach ensures that all pieces of dough
spend an equal amount of time resting on the bench,
which ultimately contributes to the consistency of
your pizza. Once the dough is preshaped, our preference is to place the dough seam side down. This
helps the seam stay in place and makes it tighter.
pieces farthest out. The process is all about flow and efficient movement.
Stay organized; if you confuse the last piece you divided with the first,
that piece may not have a chance to relax enough. For thin- and medium-crust pizza doughs, you don't need to worry about FIFO after the
preshaping step.
6 5) 4
(3) 2 1
8
(1) 7 (12)
T
L
(2) 5 8 11
(3 (4 10
1 If making bread-like pizzas, prepare your
pans as instructed in the recipes.
4 Begin dividing the dough with your bench
knife.
7 Let the dough rest for 15-20 min to give it
time to relax.
2 Transfer the dough to your worktable. 5 Weigh each piece of dough to ensure
consistency. 3 Mentally divide the dough into the number
of pieces you'll need.
8 Shape (for bread-like pizzas, extend and
stretch the dough to fit into the pan completely) using the same first in, first out
method.
58
6 Preshape, beginning with the first piece of
dough you divided and working through
the pieces in order. For bread-like pizzas,
place them in the oiled pans they will be
proofed and baked in. Cover well.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PRESHAPING VERY WET DOUGHS
Working with wet doughs is notoriously difficult. Handling them can be a
gloppy and frustrating task. Fortunately, a variety of methods can make it
easier, such as oiling your work surface or chilling the dough. We've also
repurposed common household items such as a plaster knife to develop
new techniques for handling wet doughs, which can be remarkably
THE OIL-SLICK METHOD
It's intuitive to add flour to a worktable hoping
to keep the dough from sticking, but it's easy to
overcompensate. As an alternative, don't flour
the table at all. Pour oil on the table instead,
and then spread it evenly with your hands (or
spray oil evenly on the table). Place the dough
on top of the slick, divide it, and preshape it.
Put the dough in an oiled pan to ferment.
THE REFRIGERATOR
useful. The first approach described below, the oil-slick method, can
introduce some oil into the dough. This can actually improve the volume
in some doughs (see page 1:324), but if you want a dough without fat,
choose another approach.
Refrigerating the dough during bulk fermentation will make the dough easier to handle.
If the dough feels firm enough to handle
after a few four-edge folds (see page 51) and
some refrigeration time, it may be possible
to move the dough to room temperature for
the remainder of bulk fermentation. Wet your
hands slightly so the dough doesn't stick when
you perform the folds. Once the dough is preshaped, cover it well and refrigerate.
PLASTER KNIFE
The same qualities that make this common
home-improvement tool useful for spreading
plaster or grout make it ingeniously handy for
manipulating wet doughs. The wide blade creates tension in the dough while shaping. See
How to Divide and Preshape Using a Plaster
Knife on page 63.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158)
59
HOW TO Preshape a Small Dough Ball
Smaller pieces of dough, such as the ones used for Neapolitan pizza
(250-300 g), can be trickier to preshape. You can't really use a single
hand as you would for small dinner rolls, and the typical two-handed
THE RING METHOD
preshaping methods (see pages 61-62) may not provide a tight, round
ball. We have two suggestions.
In this method we use our index finger and our thumb. They will form a ring to push the dough through.
3 4
1 Place the square of dough in your dominant hand.
For most doughs, mist the surface lightly with water
(see the specific recipes for guidance). This keeps
plastic wrap from sticking.
For more on how to shape thin-crust and medium-crust
pizzas, see pages 3:12 and 3:66.
2 Form a ring with the index finger and your
thumb on the same hand.
3 With your fingers from the opposite hand,
push the dough through the ring. This
should result in a smooth, tight ball.
4 Make sure to pinch the seams shut well.
Otherwise, the dough will tear when you
shape it for baking, or it might cause a weak
spot that will allow sauce and toppings to
break through while baking.
5 Place the dough seam side down in its
fermentation tray or tub, and cover well.
THE CROSS-LINKED FINGERS METHOD
In this method we use our interlocked fingers from both hands to create a dough ball.
1
la
4
60
Tuck in the four corners ofa square of
dough. Interlock your fingers. Place the
dough in your hands, tucked corners down.
1b
2 Bring your hands together until you can't
bring them any closer, to form a dough
oval.
4 Make sure to pinch the seams shut well.
Otherwise, the dough will tear when you
shape it for baking, or it might cause a weak
spotthat willallow sauce and toppings to
break through while baking.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
3 Rotate the dough 90° and bring your hands
together again. This should result in a tight
ball.
5
Place the dough seam side down in its
fermentation tray or tub, and cover well.
HOW TO Preshape a Medium or Large Dough Ball
This method is used for larger balls of dough, such as New York
pizza dough, which can range in size from 350-400 g up to 1.2 kg. In
bread-baking terms this shape would be known as a boule, which means
"ball" in French. Once you have divided and weighed all your dough
THE SQUARE METHOD
pieces, you can begin to preshape the dough balls using one of the following: the Square Method, the Tuck-In Method, or the Wonton-Shape
Method (on the next page).
Beginners and pros alike can use this shape, proving anew that simple is sometimes best. This method is easy and
producesa very good structure for the dough to keep its roundness. It's also fast.
2 3
1 To preshape, place each cut square of
dough smooth side down. Fold the top
one-third ofthe dough toward the middle,
and then fold the bottom one-third toward
the middle, overlapping the ends slightly to
form an envelope.
2 Rotate the dough 90° and roll the dough
up lengthwise.
4
3
Gently round the dough with both hands,
leaving the seam side down, to create a
tight, round package.
If necessary, pinch the seam shut. This is
important to prevent it from ripping when
you shape it.
5 Place the dough ball seam side down in its
fermenting tray, pan, or tub. Cover well.
For most doughs, you won't need to flour or oil the
tray, pan, or tub used for fermenting. Check the
recipe for specific instructions.
THE TUCK-IN METHOD
This is the easiest method for shaping a ball, so start with this one if you're new to shaping; all you
have to do is tuck in the edges of the dough to form a ball.
3 4
1
2
To preshape, turn each cut square of dough
over so the smooth side is up.
Pick up the dough with your hands so none
of it is touching the worktable; tuck the
edges in and under to form a rudimentary
ball shape.
3 Gently round the dough with your hands,
leaving the seam side down, to create a
tight, round package.
4 If necessary, pinch the seam shut. This is
important to prevent it from ripping when
you shape it.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
5 Place the dough ball seam side down in its
fermenting tray, pan, or tub. Cover well.
61
6
THE WONTON-SHAPE METHOD
This method (based on how some wonton dumplings are shaped) will
take a few tries to get right, but it's our favorite because the dough maintains its form so well throughout fermentation. Essentially,you're creating
2a 2b
folds in an overlapping circular pattern. The pattern gives the dough a
consistent distribution of gluten tension that can expand evenly.
1 To preshape, place each cut square smooth
side down.
2 Mentally divide your dough into six equal
parts. Take the edge of one part, starting
with a corner of the dough. Pull it out, then
fold it toward the center of the dough;
repeat this step with the remaining pieces.
Overlap the last one to form a tight seal.
HOW TO Preshape a Bâtard
3 Gently round the dough with your hands,
leaving the seam side down, to create a
tight, round package.
4 Pinch the seam shut. This is important to
prevent it from ripping when you shape it.
The term "bâtard" describes an oval loaf of bread, no matter what size.
This shape isn't often used for pizza, but we prefer it when we are shaping
oval pizzas like Roman Pizza alla Pala (see page 164). This method is easy
5
Place the dough ball seam side down in its
fermenting tray, pan, or tub. Coverwell.
and very fast. We recommend it not only for beginners but also for busy
pizza makers who have many pizzas to preshape.
1
62
To preshape, place the rectangle of dough
lengthwise on the worktable. Fold the top
one-third of the dough toward the middle,
and then fold the bottom one-third toward
the middle, overlapping the ends slightly to
form an envelope.
2a 2b
2
Roll the dough away from you, and continue to gently roll it back and forth until it
just comes together.
3
Place the bâtard seam side up in its fermenting tray, pan, or tub. Cover well.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Roman Pizza alla Pala Dough (see page 164) is one of the
doughs we preshape into a bâtard for proofing.
1
HOW TO Divide and Preshape Using a Plaster Knife
This tool is typically used for applying plaster and other materials to
drywall. It has a wide, sharp blade (not as sharp as a knife, though) and a
centered handle. You can purchase one at any hardware store. We suggest
using one that has a stainless steel blade that is at least 20 cm/8 in wide.
The length of the blade will allow you to lift and move the dough around
the table with ease. Surprisingly, almost no flour is needed for this; in
fact, too much flour defeats the purpose since the idea is for the dough
to cling to the table while you move it with the knife.
Transfer the dough to your worktable; dust
the surface of the dough with a little bench
flour.
2
Using the plaster knife, divide the dough if
necessary, cutting it and pushing the pieces
away from the main mass of dough.
3
4 To preshape, scrape the knife at the base of
the dough and push it away from you (or
pull it toward you-whichever motion is
most comfortable); the dough will be ovalshaped at this point.
5a
5 Rotate the dough 90° with the knife and
push it (or pull it) again. It will still be ovalshaped. Do this on all four sides so that you
generate tension throughout the entire
piece of dough.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
Using the plaster knife, lift each piece onto
the scale to weigh it, smooth side up. Coat
the scale and your hands with flour or spray
oil if the dough is difficult to handle. Place
the dough pieces on the worktable after
dividing.
5b
6 Place the dough ball seam side down in its
fermenting tray, pan, or tub. Cover well.
63
6
COMMON PRESHAPING PROBLEMS
A number of problems can arise from shaping a dough incorrectly, but many mistakes can be salvaged.
THE SEAM IS INCORRECTLY FORMED
The seam is not binding, likely because
the dough is too dry, the seam was not sealed
initially, or too much flour is interfering.
SOLUTION
If the seam is not sealed when you place the dough in the container, lightly mist some water in the seam and pinch it shut; the
water should bind the seam in place.
THE SURFACE IS UNDERFLOURED
The dough is sticking to the table and ripping.
SOLUTION
• Dust the table more generously and then reshape the dough, making sure that the torn part winds
up in the interior of the dough. Note that the surface of Neapolitan pizza dough should never be
floured. The trick with this dough is to act quickly and never handle it for too long or it will stick to
your fingers.
THE SURFACE IS OVERFLOURED
You're chasing the dough around the table and
have no traction.
SOLUTION
Brush off the excess flour and spray a light mist of water on
the table so the dough has something to cling to while you
shape it. Don't overdo the water-that creates the same problem (a slick surface) as too much flour.
THE SHAPING IS TOO LOOSE
The dough isn't tense enough; it looks like a
misshapen, bubbly-surfaced blob.
SOLUTION
Reshape your dough, but this time with a little more
rigor so that it's uniform and will still hold its shape
after a few minutes.
64 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
FINAL PROOFING
In the dividing and preshaping process, gas in the
dough is depleted. Final proofing replaces that gas
with new carbon dioxide, continuing the fermentation that began when the water and flour were first
mixed. This new gas expands the dough's existing
bubbles and (depending on the dough) creates an
open crumb structure, making the baked crust soft
and pleasant to eat. The pizza maker's role is to
provide a protective environment for the dough to
develop, and then to judge when final proofing is
complete. Perfecting this assessment takes experience and patience, so paying close attention at this
stage is crucial; a pizza's volume and flavor are partly
determined by how accurately it's proofed.
Environmental factors and ingredients affect the
final proofing time in ways that we can quantify,
at least to some extent. The type of yeast (commercial yeast versus levain) and its percentage in
the dough make a difference. So does the ambient
temperature; generally, higher temperatures (up to
a certain point) mean faster fermentation. Many of
our doughs are cold-proofed (or have an optional
cold-proofing step), which slows down fermentation
and allows for greater flavor development. Also,
longer overall fermentation times before the final
proofing stage result in greater carbon dioxide
production. Lower hydration doughs ferment more
slowly than those with higher hydration.
But determining when final proofing is complete-known as calling proof-is also an art. There
are no truly foolproof methods, nor instruments
that measure that endpoint. The fingertip test (seе
page 76), which is the most common method for
determining final proof, relies heavily on experience.
Another popular method is to proof until the dough
"doubles in size." We find this a somewhat misguided
instruction; not all doughs must double to be fully
proofed, and doubling is difficult to gauge.
We provide a range of final proofing times in our
recipes, but these are guidelines rather than precise
measurements. Even controlled environments, such
as a proofer, can vary in humidity and temperature,
altering the timeline. In general, proofing for longer
than recommended will result in much less oven
spring and, if the dough overproofs, it can collapse
in the oven. Shortened proofing times will typically
result in an irregular oven spring and a tighter
crumb structure. But the dough also has a margin of
forgiveness. A pizza's characteristics will not change
considerably if the final proofing time varies within
±15% of our guidelines. Our dough recipes take you
through the final proofing step, and then we cover
the shaping and baking instructions in the Iconic
Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
During our travels to Brazil, we ran across two
unusual things in our visit to Bráz Quintal. The
first was that they have three different doughs,
which was more than most pizzerias, especially
in Brazil. The house dough is made with a combination of whole wheat flour, rye flour, bread
flour, and 00 flour. They also have a whole
wheat dough that is 80hydration and a
dough made with Caputo Nuvola 00 Flour.
Even more astonishing was that they proof
each ball of dough in an individual clear plastic
container. They like being able to monitor the
fermentation of each dough and shape it only
when it is perfectly proofed.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 65
6
Doughs can be proofed in any number of
vessels, from proofing boxes (see photo
above) to sheet pans (see photo on the next
page) to the pans that they will be baked in
(see photo below).
PROOFING CONTAINERS
Proofing in trays, sheet pans, or tubs allows you to
contain and easily move the dough, and some pizza
doughs are best suited to certain types of containers.
Doughs that are balled up to be eventually flattened
and baked directly on an oven floor, such as thincrust, Neapolitan, New York, or artisan pizzas, or
those that are baked in a deep ring pan, like deepdish pizza, are typically placed in shallow, stackable
tubs. Another option is to proof these doughs
on plastic sheet pans that are then covered with
plastic wrap. Doughs that are baked in pans, such as
focaccia and Detroit-style, high-hydration al taglio,
and New York square pizzas, are typically proofed
directly in the pan in which they will be baked. This
makes workflow faster and minimizes handling of
the dough.
Stackable Tubs
Whether you're proofing in a cold, room-temperature,
or hot environment, these plastic tubs work very well
for small, medium, and large dough balls. They come
in a number of sizes, so choose whatever makes
sense for your production. The most common size
holds a 4-by-3 grid of Neapolitan pizza dough and
is 57 cm long by 36 cm wide by 8 cm deep / 22/½ in
long by 141/½ in wide by 314 in deep. Stacking saves
space and also keeps the dough covered to prevent it
from drying out.
Plastic Sheet Pans
These are not stackable and need to be placed on
a rack.We recommend plastic rather than metal
sheet pans because metal can stain the dough gray.
Plastic sheet pans are available in the same sizes as
aluminum sheet pans. You'll need to cover the dough
with plastic wrap or a tarp to keep it from drying out.
We mist most doughs with water before covering to
keep the plastic wrap from sticking to the dough.
Metal Baking Pans
For each of our master pan-baked pizza recipes, we
specify a pan size.We also have recommended pan
sizes for our Sfincione Dough (see page 157) and
Argentinean-Style "al Molde” Pizza Dough (see page
170). We recommend steel pans because they're the
sturdiest but, not surprisingly, they're more expensive than other metals.
In a pinch, use half or full aluminum sheet pans.
In the high temperatures of a pizza oven, radiant
heat transfer (infrared light) is much more important than it is for conventional baking. Therefore,
the surface finish of the pan really matters. A shiny
aluminum pan is reflecting more than 90% of the
infrared light whereas a black pan is absorbing 90%
(see page 1:351). Aluminum pans also have an
unfortunate tendency to warp, which is why pizza
pans are usually made of steel since they won't warp
at higher temperatures.
66 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Focaccia pan
Detroit-style pizza pan
Roman al taglio pizza pan
Grandma-style pizza pan
FOCACCIA AND SICILIAN PIZZA PANS
This pan can be used for focaccia and New York
square pizza (or any rectangular dough); it's usually
made of heavy-duty black steel, which conducts heat
evenly and can have a nonstick coating or, ideally, be
cured. The frame is reinforced with a steel bar so the
pan doesn't warp on a hot deck-oven floor or baking
stone. These pans come in a half-sheet-pan-size only.
These pans are frequently sold as Sicilian pizza pans.
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA PANS
This iconic tapered rectangular pan made of black
steel was originally used to hold auto parts on the
assembly line in factories (see page 1:250). It's
sturdy and doesn't warp. The fact that it's black
makes it a great absorber of radiant heat, which
allows the cheese rim to reach its signature crispy
texture. Look for a pan that's factory-cured. Curing
makes it easier to remove the pizza without sticking.
It's the deepest of the rectangular and square pans.
These come in a number of sizes, but the largest (35
cm by 25 cm / 14 in by 10 in) is the classic.
ROMAN AL TAGLIO PIZZA PANS
These black steel pans have a deep and sharply
angled frame that, unlike most sheet pans, isn't
tapered. It's intended to produce a sharp edge on the
corners of the pizza. They come in two sizes: full (60
cm by 40 cm / 24 in by 16 in) and half (60 cm by 20
cm/24 in by 8 in). You can buy special clamps for
handling Roman al taglio pans without damaging
the pizza.
GRANDMA-STYLE PIZZA PANS
These pans are used to make a type of pizza common in the New York / New Jersey area (see page
1:101). They are the same as the Detroit-style pizza
pans but tend to be square and shallower.
ALUMINUM SHEET PANS
Aluminum sheet pans are used for some types of
pizza such as Old Forge (see page 1:249). The
dough is stretched to fill either the half or full sheet
pan and then proofed. Aluminum is our least favorite
material for proofing and baking. It tends to stain
the dough with grayish-black streaks and, worse,
warps significantly in the oven. Choose pans with
reinforced frames if you can find them. Line with
parchment paper to prevent staining.
ARGENTINEAN PIZZA PANS
This is a large (35-38 cm / 14–15 in) round aluminum or black steel pan with a tapered frame that's
used for thick-crust pizzas such as Argentinean-Style
"al Molde" Pizza (see page 3:126). These pans
are available in smaller sizes, but this is the most
common size. If you are having trouble locating
these specific pans, we provide alternatives in the
Resources section on page 3:377.
CAST-IRON PANS
Black cured cast-iron pans are available in many
shapes (round and square), depths (shallow and
deep), and sizes. They can also come with various
features such as a grill texture or different handles.
Cast iron is a great conductor of heat and will produce pizzas with a crispy bottom. It's rather inexpensive and can be used for multiple purposes, but some
pans can be cumbersome because they're heavy. It's
important to keep them clean by scrubbing with salt;
also, don't get them wet because they can rust.
DEEP-DISH PIZZA PANS
This is a round pan that happens to look like a cake
pan. We highly recommend you get a pan with a
removable base. Deep-dish pizza is slightly different
from the other pan-baked pizzas in that it's divided
after a short bench rest, balled, and then proofed,
well covered, in a tray or tub. It's not proofed in the
pan because it's rolled out rather than stretched to
fill the pan as the dough proofs.
Sheet pan
Argentinean pizza pan
Cast-iron pan
Deep-dish pizza pan
69
6
When you have multiple pizzas proofing, it is
crucial to keep an eye on them during service
to ensure that the dough isn't overproofing.
FINAL PROOFING METHODS
All the steps that occur between mixing and baking
are part of the fermentation process, but the main
period of fermentation happens during final proofing.
This begins once the dough is shaped and placed in
a proofing vessel or on a flat surface. Final proofing
will have an effect on flavor and texture and is key in
determining the shape, volume, crust, and crumb of
the baked pizza. Indeed, the goals offinal proofing
are twofold: developing flavor and increasing volume
through the production of carbon dioxide.
To achieve this, you'll need to support the dough
in a tub or on a surface, provide a constant temperature for the proper amount of time, and protect
the dough's surface from drying out. (A dried-out
surface forms a skin that will restrict the dough's
rise and rip during expansion.) Still, various types of
dough will proof in different ways and in different
environments. It takes hands-on practice to become
familiar enough with a given dough to recognize
when it's properly proofed.
Most of the carbon dioxide produced during fermentation happens in the final proofing stage. The
largest volume increase comes during baking, when
certain styles of pizza can increase greatly in volume.
To expand during both processes, the dough must
be strong enough to retain the gas that's produced.
Gluten makes the dough elastic enough that the
bubble walls can expand without tearing. The
dough's ability to retain gas results from the shear
hardening of the membranes, which is measured
through a test called biaxial stretching (see note on
next page). When carbon dioxide exerts more pressure than a fully proofed dough can withstand, the
cell membranes tear, releasing the gas and deflating
the dough. Ideally, no dough will get to that point.
Instead, we want to catch it just as it reaches peak
proofing and bake it immediately. Doing so is known
as calling proof. This is a pizza-making skill that's
developed over time.
An overproofed dough won't expand much
during baking, and neither will an underproofed
one. Overproofed doughs collapse due to a weakened gluten structure and excessive gas production,
while underproofed doughs don't have quite enough
carbon dioxide production to expand significantly.
Although overproofing is commonly thought to be a
fatal error, we'll share a method we recommend for
saving your dough; see Dough CPR on page 77.
The proofing methods that follow range from
the simplest to the most advanced. Some of these
methods are widely used, and a few are less popular.
Experiment and decide which one suits you best.
When we decided whether a method was simple or
advanced, we mainly took into account the equipment required for it. Keeping your dough in a tub or
pan, covered with plastic and in a warm spot in your
kitchen (or in the refrigerator) is the most fundamental way of proofing. That, to us, is the essence of
simplicity (but it's not without its complications).
Proofing at Room Temperature
This might seem like the simplest method for proofing dough that also requires the least equipment, but
it can be challenging to perform consistently because
it depends on keeping a consistent ambient temperature (we recommend 21°C/70°F). The only way to
do this is to have some form of temperature control.
Otherwise, the temperature can vary by location, by
day, and even by the hour. If you're inexperienced
in calling proof, that's a lot of variation to take into
account. You may want to keep the dough close to a
warm oven so that fermentation happens faster than
at room temperature (although the trade-off is that
you might not develop as much flavor in the dough).
Keep the dough well covered so it doesn't form a skin.
Cold-Proofing Your Dough
Cold-proofing slows down fermentation and is
typically accomplished by refrigerating the dough
for 24-96 hours. This technique lets you adapt the
dough's needs to your own schedule, but it's not
just about convenience. The long proofing time also
improves flavor.
The long and slow final proofing also makes the
dough easy to stretch and handle after it's tempered
for 2 hours. Doughs leavened with levain cold-proof
well, as do doughs leavened with a combination
of commercial yeast and levain. However, coldproofing doesn't work for all types of dough; we
don't like it for ourur pan-baked doughs because it
results in lower volume. Most refrigerators have
temperatures in the range of 0.5-4.4°C / 33–40° F.
If possible, adjust the temperature to 4°C /39° F;
temperatures lower than this can slow down yeast
fermentation too much.
We noticed something very interesting about the
way Neapolitan pizza is made in Naples versus elsewhere. In Naples, the doughs are proofed at room
temperature regardless of the season (see page 88).
Some pizzaioli adjust the yeast amount (more in the
winter, less in the summer) and some, unfortunately,
adjust the salt instead (but then the dough tastes
different from season to season). In most other parts
of the world, nearly everyone cold-proofs the dough
for 24-48 hours. We have Neapolitan pizza dough
recipes utilizing both ambient and cold-proofing
so that you can select a recipe that works best for
70 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
you. This is also a widely used proofing method
for thin-crust pizza dough, New York pizza dough,
and artisan pizza dough. Some al taglio pizza dough
makers proof for as long as 96 hours, but we find this
unnecessary.
If you extend the cold-proofing time (and if
you're not using malted flours), we recommend
adding some diastatic malt powder (DMP) when
your dough is first mixed. DMP is primarily used to
compensate for the deficiency in enzyme (mainly
amylase) activity of the flour. Without sufficient
amylase, the fermentation activity and crust color of
the baked pizza will suffer. That's why there's malt in
many commercial (and sometimes organic) flours.
Diastatic malt powder is also added to some
recipes when there's a high percentage of fermented
flour (a large portion of the dough is made up ofa
preferment; see page 1:298). During a long fermentation, the yeast consumes a large amount of simple
sugars. If there's no adjustment to compensate for
the depleted sugars, the finished product might
have a pale crust, as adequate sugars ensure proper
coloration. To eliminate this problem, DMP is added
at from 0.3% to 1%, depending on the percentage
of fermented flour. Adding DMP produces extra
enzyme activity in the final dough and more starch
degradation, which in turn results in more simple
sugars, leading to more browning. You can use pure
amylase as a substitute for diastatic malt powder;
amylase is available at beer supply stores.
Proofing in a Proofer
An electric proofer produces heat and warm water to
create a humid environment. The simplest models
are enclosed metal cabinets (some of which are
insulated) that have a pan at their base to hold water.
The pan sits on top of a heating element, and you set
the box's temperature using a dial. The basic models
are fitted with shelves to accommodate wooden
boards or sheet pans; because they're on wheels,
proofers can be moved easily. More sophisticated
versions are connected to a water line, have digital
controls to set a specific relative humidity and
temperature, and can be set to both cold and warm
temperatures. Most of those models are not mobile
and are instead positioned directly on the floor so
that a rolling rack filled with dough can be wheeled
into them. These proofers vary in capacity.
Researchers and industrial facilities
evaluate a dough's ability to expand
during proofing and baking through a
procedure called biaxial stretching (or
biaxial extension). It involves stretching a piece of dough in two opposing
directions and then inflating it like a
balloon, thereby mimicking the activity
of carbon dioxide bubbles that cause
dough to rise. Measuring devices,
including the alveograph (see page
1:278), assess how the dough deforms
or ruptures under the pressure.
Diastatic malt powder is a natural
extract of malted grain, which contains
the enzymes that the grain seedling
needs to break the starch stored in the
grain into simple sugars. Yeast has the
same needs.
THE SCIENCE OF HOW BUBBLES GROW IN DOUGH
The bubbles in pizza dough are there from the start. Through the process of mixing, air is incorporated (often by sticking to particles in flour),
which create myriad tiny bubbles. Those bubbles act like tiny balloons,
and gluten plays the part of the rubber in the balloon (it's gas tight and
very stretchy).
After mixing, the bubbles store carbon dioxide and a tiny bit of alcohol (ethanol) created by the yeast. During fermentation, the amount of
gas produced depends on the volume that went in. These gases increase
during the fermentation stage. Both preshaping and shaping destroy a
lot of bubbles by squishing them as the pizza is formed, but there are still
hundreds of thousands, if not millions, remaining.
During baking, the bubbles are inflated by steam, which comes from
water boiling inside the dough. A bread baker calls this oven spring.
Oven spring in most breads is a moderate factor (the rise of a loaf is
much more dependent on what happens during the fermentation stage),
whereas in pizza dough, because of the higher oven temperatures, it's
a very large factor. For example, the rim area of most Neapolitan pizzas
is quite flat when it goes into the oven (with the same amount of dough
in the edges as in the center). Yet it becomes immensely taller during
baking as the steam inflates the bubbles created during the mixing
and proofing stages. The result is the open crumb characteristic of the
Neapolitan style.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 71
6
EXPERIMENT
PREVENTING BLACK SPOTS IN PIZZA DOUGH
When dough is exposed to air for a significant length of time, like in the
case of cold-proofed dough, the fragments of bran present in the flour
will oxidize and turn a darker color. Black spots will appear, typically after
several days, giving the balled dough a salt-and-pepper appearance.
This doesn't mean that there is anything wrong with the dough; it can
be baked and enjoyed as usual and the black specks will disappear after
baking. But we still wanted to see whether we could prevent the spots
from forming in the first place.
One simple solution was to add a small amount of ascorbic acid to
the dough (0.1), which allowed us to store the dough for 5-7 days
without seeing any black spots. Since the formation of black spots in
refrigerated doughs is associated with the oxidation of the polyphenols
of the bran, it is easy to understand the role of ascorbic acid, which is an
antioxidant. The downside to this method, however, was that the dough
became tighter (see graph at left, below). We recommend using a small
amount of dough relaxer (see page 1:327) to mitigate the strengthening
of the dough.
Another way to troubleshoot this problem is to increase the amount
Control versus 0.1% Ascorbic Acid (Day 4)
of yeast. When baker's yeast is added, particularly instant dry yeast,
it brings along a lot of monomeric glutathione into the dough. Since
yeast is metabolically a scavenger of oxygen molecules, both factors
would counteract oxidation during refrigerated storage. In other words,
increased yeast diminishes the black specks in dough by metabolizing
oxygen and producing a more anaerobic environment within the dough.
More yeast creates more carbon dioxide, thus reducing the oxidation
effect responsible for the development of black spots.
When we compared cold-proofed dough made with 0.25yeast
to the master dough with 0.04 yeast, the black specks are observed
only in the latter, given the fact that the extra yeast removes the oxygen
which would otherwise be available for oxidative changes. The speckling is different for the two yeast amounts, with the doughs with more
yeast looking generally better than the ones with less yeast. If the dough
aesthetics are not important to you, our advice is to bake the dough
regardless of black specks. If the look of the dough plays a role for your
business, ascorbic acid (with a dough relaxer) or a higher percentage of
yeast will help.
Force (g)
180
160
140
- Control
-0.11%
ascorbic
acid
120
100 100
80
60
40
20
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
0.25 yeast
Extensibility (mm)
72 h at 4°C/39°F
0.04 yeast
The pH of the dough with more yeast is higher, which effectively reduces the browning
reaction rate and gives a finished Neapolitan crust with less leoparding.
72
Neapolitan dough (0.04 yeast) with 0.1ascorbic acid is firmer than the control dough and
doesn't show black specks.
96 h at 4°C/39°F
0.25 yeast 0.04 yeast
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Prepare Your Dough for Cold-Proofing or Room-Temperature Proofing
FOR DOUGH BALLS PROOFED
IN STACKABLE TUBS
1 Preshape the dough balls and place them
in a stackable tub, spacing them out evenly
in a grid. Give them room so they don't
proof into each other too much.
2 Lightly mist the surface of the dough balls
with water.
3 Stack another tub on top.
4 Refrigerate if cold-proofing. If roomtemperature proofing, check the dough
periodically by using the fingertip test
(see page 76) to determine the stage of
proofing.
1
FOR DOUGH BALLS PROOFED
IN PLASTIC SHEET PANS
Preshape the dough balls and place them
on the sheet pan; space them out evenly in
a grid. Give them enough room so they
don't proof into each other too much.
2 Lightly mist the surface of the dough balls
with water.
3 Cover the dough balls directly with plastic
wrap or a tarp.
4 Refrigerate if cold-proofing. If roomtemperature proofing, check the dough
periodically by lifting the plastic and using
the fingertip test (see page 76) to determine
the stage of proofing.
FOR DOUGHS PROOFED
AND BAKED IN A PAN
1
2
3
Prehape the dough and place it in its generously oiled baking pan.
Cover the pan with a clean plastic bag or
tarp. Tent the bag with air and tie the bag
shut but not too tightly; it should be easy to
open and close. You'll need easy access to
the dough to stretch it out to fill the pan
while it's proofing, and this might take a
few tries to complete.
Once the dough has been stretched
enough to fill the pan, refrigerate if coldproofing. If room-temperature proofing,
check the dough periodically by opening
the bag and using the fingertip test (see
page 76) to determine the stage of
proofing.
These photos show the steps for preparing doughs proofed in
plastic sheet pans, but the steps are relatively similar for the
other methods.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 73
6
HOW TO Proof with a Proofer (aka Proofer Cabinet or Proofing Box)
MONDAY
8180F
2 When the proofer reaches the set temperature from step 1, place the dough inside and
set the timer.
3 Check the dough after the allotted time for
proofing as suggested in your recipe.
1
Set the proofer to the desired temperature
and relative humidity.
While you strive to create an optimal environment in which yeast and lactic acid bacteria will thrive-which
helps ferment your dough-be aware that they're not the only microorganisms that can get comfortable in
your proofer. It's a good idea to clean the box after each use; at the very least, leave the door open and let the
proofer air-dry for a few hours to prevent mold from growing. We recommend 27°C/80°F (with 65% relative
humidity) across the board when using a proofer.
For many pizzerias, a proofer-retarder is not a very practical machine to have because pizzas are baked
throughout the day rather than all at once (except for al taglio and New York square pizza, which is baked
ahead of time). If all your doughs are warm proofed and need to be ready to bake at once, this is not a benefit
by any means.
HOW TO Proof with a Rolling Rack Cover
Used in some pizzerias, bakeries, and restaurants, the rolling rack cover
is similar to a home proofer but can handle a higher volume of dough. It's
an economical alternative to a proofer, taking advantage of readily available equipment. The drawback is that it's difficult to maintain a consistent
temperature, much less a consistent humidity, because the heat source
is a solid alcohol canister. The heat output can be somewhat controlled
by using either a single canister or two canisters partially covered with a
metal plate. Another option is to use an enclosed metal cabinet rack, in
which case no rack cover is needed. For most pizza doughs, a refrigerator
for cold-proofing is a better option thana proofer.
1 Drape the cover overthe rack and put a
sheet pan on the bottom rung.
2 Place one ortwo solid alcohol canisters on
the sheet pan, and light them with a torch.
74
3
Place a second sheet pan close to the lit
fuel. Put a hotel pan directly on this second
sheet pan, and fill the hotel pan with hot
water.
4 Close the rack cover and allow for the environment inside the rack to get warm and
humid, 15-30 min.
5 Open the rack cover, insert your dough,
and close the cover promptly to minimize
heat loss. We recommend using clear covers so you can see inside the rack. (Even if
there's some condensation on the surface
ofthe cover, you'll still be able to see your
dough.) Make sure the water in the hotel
pan doesn't completely evaporate. Try not
to open and close it too much so it doesn't
lose heat and humidity.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EXPERIMENT
PROOFING TIME AND TEMPERATURE RECOMMENDATIONS
Our master recipes for each kind of pizza dough include times and
temperatures for proofing. These conditions will bring out the best in the
dough and will consistently deliver a dough with the specific key characteristics for each pizza (see page 3:3). Be aware that these times are
guidelines, however, and keep your eye on your dough as it proofs.
In some pizzerias or homes, however, it may be difficult or impossible
to create the recommended conditions. For example, air conditioning
or ample refrigerator storage space may not be available. You might have
tight time constraints or, on the flip side, there are cases when slowing
down dough development may be more practical. In the latter scenario,
cold-proofed doughs that are dormant can be held relatively stable until
the pizza maker is ready to use them. Note that weaker yeast activity and
slower dough development will continue even when refrigerated.
We experimented to find out whether each of our master doughs
can proof at different temperatures and, if so, how long that takes and
whether they need to be handled differently. Using the following table,
you'll be able to delay, hold, or speed up the dough development process depending on the conditions.
We cold-proofed New York and artisan pizza doughs for 7 days at
4°C/39°F. These doughs turned out to be relatively stable and delivered a positive result after the first day and up to 4 days. After 5 days,
the dough declined in yeast activity, and the pizza began to lose flavor
and structure.
We tried proofing our master thin-crust pizza dough at typical
room-temperature proofing conditions and then baked pizzas after 1, 2, 3,
4, 6, and 24 hours. The 2-and 3-hour proofing times produced pizzas with
the best attributes, which is what we have included in our master recipe
on page 110 (you can opt to cold-proof the dough after this point if you'd
like; it makes the dough easier to handle). At 6 hours the dough at room
temperature was overproofed, and the pizza quality started to decline.
Because many types of bread are warm proofed,we tried this with
pizza. When warm-proofing, the majority of the bread-like pizzas are
typically proofed for 2 hours at 27°C/80°F. Our focaccia, New York
square, and high-hydration al taglio doughs were also tested at 1-,3-, and
4-hour proof times to see how they compared. For focaccia, the 1-hour
proofed dough gave a tighter crumb with a volume that was lower than
our master focaccia by a statistically significant margin. With an increase
in proofing time, the focaccia dough became slacker and gassier, with gas
bubbles becoming more noticeable on top of the baked pizza. The flavor
of the 4-hour focaccia was very sour and the texture became softer.
For our New York square dough, the 3-hour proofed pizza resulted
in a small and uneven crumb, while a drastic reduction in volume was
observed after 4 hours. The high-hydration al taglio dough was malleable and supple at all of the times we tested. The volume of the 1-hour
proofed pizza was inferior, however, and fell out of the statistical range
of volumes (see page 396), confirming that this proof time is insufficient.
The 2-, 3-,and 4-hour pizzas had an even golden color, a good flavor, an
expected chew, and a crispy crumb. We concluded that these doughs
can tolerate a range of 2-4 hoursrs at warm-proofing temperatures; in our
master recipes, we recommend proofing them for 3 hours.
We should caution, however, that alternative proof temperatures
listed below could also lead to different results. For our cold-proofed
doughs, for example, refrigeration does more than just slow down
the yeast activity. During cold-proofing, the dough itself continues to
develop flavor attributes that are critical to the outcome of the pizza.
Because of this, we strongly recommend cold-proofing for New York
and artisan pizza doughs. Using room-temperature or warm-proofing in
these doughs leads to underdeveloped flavors and a lack of crispiness.
Although some proofing temperatures can lead to acceptable results
without major alterations to the final products, pizza makers should use
the recipe's recommended proof temperatures whenever possible.
OUR PROOFING TIME AND TEMPERATURE RECOMMENDATIONS
We proofed each of our master doughs in the three conditions listed
below to see how each performed. Cold- and room-temperature proofing made thin-crust and medium-crust pizzas that were crisp and flavorful. Room-temperature and warm-proofing provided the best results for
Cold-proofing (4° C/39°F)
Thin-crust pizza dough (24 h)
Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough (24 h)
Deep-dish pizza dough (24 h)
Neapolitan pizza dough with poolish (48 h)
New York pizza dough (48 h)
Artisan pizza dough (48 h)
pan-baked pizzas, which were crisp and light with a good chew. For thincrust pizzas, you can roll out cold-proofed dough without tempering. For
medium-crust pizzas, cold-proofed dough needs to temper for 2 hours at
room temperature before using.
Room temperature (21°C/70° F)
Thin-crust pizza dough (2 h)
Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough (1/½ h)
Deep-dish pizza dough (2-4 h)
Neapolitan pizza dough (20-24 h)
Focaccia dough (3 h)
New York square pizza dough (3 h)
High-hydration al taglio pizza dough (3 h)
Detroit-style pizza dough (3 h)
Warm-proofing (27°C/80°F)
Focaccia dough (2h)
New York square pizza dough (2 h)
High-hydration al taglio pizza dough (2 h)
Detroit-style pizza dough (2/½ h)
We tried proofing our focaccia and high-hydration
al taglio pizza doughs, with yeast or levain or both,
in the wine refrigerator at 13° C/55° F because that
was one of the tricks we learned in Modernist Bread
to improve the results of doughs made with levain.
Unfortunately, the results were less than stellar and
we don't recommend it forthese pizzas.
We recommend tempering cold-proofed dough for 2 h
(or for however long it takes for the dough to come up to
13°C/55° F) before baking it.
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH 75
6
Check the dough to see if it is fully proofed
and ready to bake. Use your finger to gently
press the exposed surface of the dough for
2 seconds. The pressure should leave a small
dent in the dough. It will slowly spring back,
but the indentation will remain clearly visible.
Proper proof
Overproofed
Dough CPR performed
CALLING PROOF
Most people can't call proof accurately because
their intuition is to look for a doubling in the height
or diameter of the piece of dough. Even if you can
judge volume accurately (we use a laser scanner to
do so), doubling doesn't reflect fermentation time
accurately. Nor does it give you the information you
need before baking. Are the bubbles in the dough
fully inflated but not ruptured? Has fermentation
progressed enough to fully develop the flavor? Does
the dough retain enough elasticity to accommodate
oven spring without risking damage to the texture of
the crumb?
Calling proof is hard to teach. Even experienced
pizzaioli find it can be one of their most difficult
tasks. Success comes from a hands-on familiarity
with the feel of a properly proofed dough and an
understanding ofits fermentation process. It's
important to think about the yeast and what it's
doing long before the shaping and final proofing
stages. Fermentation starts practically at the instant
the flour and yeast become hydrated. If the dough
was bulk-fermented for too long or sat on the worktable for an extended period before dividing or shaping, it will either proof very quickly once it's shaped
or may even overproof before that. You can usually
extend the final proof of the dough by refrigerating it
once it's been shaped. The type of dough will dictate
its adaptability to such factors.
The right moment for calling proof is when
there's an optimal relationship between the amount
of gas in the dough and the ideal gas-retention
properties of the gluten network. Keep in mind that
more gas will be produced during oven spring, so
the gluten should still be strong enough to retain the
gas and ensure proper volume and crumb structure.
With experience, you'll be able to simply use touch
to determine whether the dough is ready to bake,
but few can call proof accurately on their first few
doughs.
To further cloud the issue, some bakers slightly
overprooftheir doughs intentionally. That's because
it produces a much more open crumb structure and
better flavor than just barely proofing a dough. An
underproofed dough will lack flavor development
and will likely have a tighter crumb because of
insufficient fermentation. Note that if you err, it's
safer to do so on the side of overproofing. If you've
cold-proofed your dough for a long period-say,
24-48 hours-it isn't exactly necessary to call proof.
By that point, it's likely ready to be pulled out, tempered for 2 hours, shaped, and then baked.
No kitchen gadget can simplify calling proof. But
ifyou're adventurous and willing to practice on a few
balls of dough, you can develop the skill through trial
and error. Try the following simple experiments to
get a better idea of how to call proof. Once the dough
has been left to prooffor the time we recommend,
take a close look at it. Has its volume increased since
it was shaped? Does it look bubbly and gassy? Does it
jiggle when you poke it or move the tub? (It should.)
Perform the fingertip test (see the next page) and
bake the dough when it seems properly proofed. If the
pizza turns out successfully, use that fingertip test as a
guide for future balls of dough. Remember what that
dough felt and looked like. Don't underestimate the
power of muscle memory.
If the dough has overproofed, you'll see telltale
signs. It will look like a balloon in the throes of
deflating. You'll see wrinkles where there were
bubbles of carbon dioxide. It will smell more like
alcohol than yeast. When baked, the pizza may have
a pale crust and a tight crumb, and you're likely to
taste alcohol.
At the other end, dough that's underproofed will
spring back quickly if you perform the fingertip test.
When baked, the dough could rip and tear on the
surface, and it's likely to become misshapen during
baking. You'll see how flat the dough stays. This may
not be a big deal for thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust,
and deep-dish pizzas, but for other styles, a super
flat pizza is a telltale sign of underproofing. It's an
instructive reminder of why dough needs time not
only to proof but also to relax the gluten and tension
created by shaping.
The Fingertip Test
In principle, there ought to be some scientific way
to determine when proofing is complete. You could
track the gradual decline in pH as fermentation progresses, for example, or measure the increase in the
dough's volume, or quantify changes to its firmness
and elasticity. We have tried all these in our lab. Our
conclusion: no. Because so many things vary from
one dough recipe to the next, no simple technical
method can be used to accurately call proof for
all kinds of dough. With enough trial and error,
it's probably feasible to find values for a volume
increase, drop in pH, or some other precise measure
that signals the end of proofing for a specific recipe.
But what most pizza makers need is an easy test that
works for most recipes.
The fingertip test fits that bill. It's not a scientific
method, and you'll have to practice to become
proficient. But the good news is, you'll need only
76 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
one tool-an index finger. And although we don't
all feel proofed dough the same way, the test is
good enough for making an educated assessment of
whether the dough is ready to move on to baking. To
perform the fingertip test, use your finger to gently
press the exposed surface ofthe dough for 2 seconds.
The pressure should leave a small dent in the dough.
It will slowly spring back, but the indentation will
remain clearly visible. The steps, illustrated at
right, are fast and straightforward and can be done
repeatedly without harming the dough. The fingertip test works reasonably well because it integrates
several different factors that change during proofing,
including the water content ofthe dough, its gluten
development, bubble integrity, and the amount of
captured gas.
Dough CPR
It happens to the best of us. You wait for your dough
to proof so you can bake it and then, somehow, you
lose track of time and it overproofs. You may even
bake the overproofed dough, hoping it will magically
return to life; instead, you end up with a pale flat
pizza that smells like an old beer.
Conventional wisdom holds that overproofed
doughs are irretrievably damaged and should be
thrown away. Our experiments found just the opposite. In fact, we were able to resuscitate the same
batch of dough up to 10 times before it suffered any
serious loss in quality. The method is so simple that
you'll want to cry for every batch of overproofed
dough you've thrown out.
The first step is to confirm that your dough really
is overproofed. It may just have excess gas rather
than something more dire. During proofing, the
size of the bubbles in the dough increase; as a result,
the cell walls between the bubbles become thinner.
Those walls undergo a process called shear hardening that makes them more elastic. At a point far
beyond that, the cell walls rupture, and the bubbles
coalesce. The gas stays in the dough, but there are
fewer (though larger) cells. Overproofing involves
an irreversible thinning and possible tearing of the
cell walls during baking. It usually takes a while for
this to actually occur, though.
Perform the fingertip test to determine the
dough's condition: ifthe dent you've created with
your finger doesn't spring back at all, the dough
is probably overproofed. The bubble walls in
overproofed doughs are stretched too thin, so they
are mechanically unable to spring back. The smell
of alcohol is also a sign. This telltale scent was key
as we developed our method for determining and
rescuing overproofed dough.
Because overproofing involves the thinning cell
walls, along with excess carbon dioxide and alcohol,
the trick to reviving your dough hinges on releasing
the gas and alcohol and reinforcing the cell walls.
Just degas the dough and reshape it. That's it.
This method works especially well for Neapolitan
dough; it also works well for thin-crust, Brazilian
thin-crust, New York, artisan, deep-dish, and
Detroit-style pizza doughs. The key is to let the
dough relax after reshaping it, giving it some time
before shaping and baking. Reshaping produces
a lot of tension in the dough and can make it very
hard to stretch open without ripping. For our pizzas
mentioned above, we wait 3-4 hours before shaping
(see pages 3:12 and 3:66 for the shaping methods
for these pizzas).
1a
1b
HOW TO Perform Dough CPR
3 4a
1 Perform the fingertip test to make sure your
dough is overproofed; the dent you make
by gently poking the dough should be
permanent (see the images in the margin
above).
2 Remove the dough from the proofing
vessel.
3 Degas the dough by pressing down firmly
on it. Use the same pressure as you would
for shaping.
4
MAKING PIZZA DOUGH
4b
Shape the dough into a ball, and return it to
its proofing container. Cover well and let
the dough relax for 3-4 h at room
temperature.
77
6
CHAPTER 7
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
PIZZA STYLES 82
OUR VARIATIONS 100
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH 110
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH 114
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH 118
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH 124
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH 132
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH 142
FOCACCIA DOUGH 148
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH 152
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO PIZZA DOUGH 158
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH 166
OUR VARIATION RECIPES 172
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
In our minds, the dough is the foundation upon
which the success or failure of a pizza rests. While
the flavor of a thin crust can be overshadowed by the
more pronounced flavors of the sauce, cheese, and
other toppings, we think any pizza with a rim is an
opportunity to showcase a well-made dough. Thick,
bread-like pizzas are built upon a voluminous crust,
making the crust central to each bite. There are
many pizza eaters out there who consider the crust
not worth eating, taking the stance that it's better to
leave more room for the cheesy topped part of the
pizza than to just fill up on "bread." We think that we
can change their minds.
For many pizza lovers, the thin crust is the
definition of pizza, the quintessential slice. While
there are a multitude of regional and international
variations on thin-crust pizza, in our research we
have identified 10 types of dough that span a wide
variety of pizza styles: thin-crust, Brazilian thincrust, deep-dish, Neapolitan, New York, artisan,
focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio,
and Detroit-style. These doughs can be used to
make the standard thin-, medium-, and thick-crust
pizzas they are typically associated with (and we
show you how on page 3:3), but we like to break
the rules. We did a series of experiments to find
out which doughs work for each different style
and found that the majority of our doughs could
be used in multiple applications-what we call
"cross-crusting"-to good and sometimes excellent
effect (see page 96).
Because of their ingredients; how the doughs
are mixed, bulk fermented (or bench rested), and
proofed; and the temperatures they are baked at,our
pizza doughs produce a variety of textures, thicknesses, and degrees of firmness. As distinct as these
crusts are, they are also versatile. We have developed
an extensive set of technique variations, including
no-knead doughs and some pizza doughs that you
can use for up to 10 days. We include flavor variations for each of the 10 master recipes to encourage
you to explore the layers of flavor that you can build
in your pizza (see page 186). We also developed a
number of gluten-free recipes (see pages 192-198).
In this chapter, we first cover the categories of the
master pizza doughs and their common characteristics, and then we get into the specifics of each pizza
dough as well as the different variations.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
Is there a right way to proof Neapolitan pizza dough? (see page 88)
Our master Neapolitan pizza dough's novel bulk fermentation step (see page 88)
Our pizza dough experiment trials and tribulations (see page 95)
Cross-crusting our master doughs (see page 96)
What dough to pick? (see page 108)
30 fat Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough (see page 117)
Second-chance levain pizza doughs (see page 173)
For recipes that call for whisking
together water and yeast (and sometimes a preferment), use a hand whisk,
not the whip attachment for the mixer.
You can also skip this step and add
the ingredients all at once if you have
had some practice mixing dough (see
page 33).
Because many of our doughs can be
made in advance (up to 2 days in some
cases), we have the instructions for
making the dough in this chapter and
the instructions for shaping and baking
the pizzas in the Iconic Recipes chapter
on page 3:3.
For more on how we define pizza styles, see
page 94.
You can use a rolling pin, a sheeter, or a
dough press to shape the ultra-thin Brazilian
thin-crust pizza dough shown on the previous
page (see page 3:12 for shaping instructions).
81
7
We have occasionally found that there
is an unspoken competition among
pizza makers for how long a dough
can ferment or how high they can
push the hydration in the dough. We
have learned that the wettest dough
doesn't necessarily produce the highest
volume, nor does an extremely long
fermentation produce a better-tasting
crust. A moderately hydrated dough
like our master Neapolitan Pizza Dough
(see page 124) can produce a crust with
a very open crumb and still remain
under 70hydration. It all has to do
with how the dough is made, shaped,
and baked.
PIZZA STYLES
Our 10 master styles of pizza dough produce pizzas
with distinctive characteristics that we discuss in
The World of Pizza, beginning on page 1:91. But
some of them share traits as well. The thin-crust
and Brazilian thin-crust pizza doughs produce
a similar finished pizza despite the dramatic
differences in hydration (20%) and fat (10 fat
in the latter dough). The main difference between
our New York pizza dough and artisan pizza
dough is just 2.51% water. These both produce
medium-crust pizzas, but that little bit of extra
Our pizza recipes showcase a wide variety of styles.Thin-crust pizza, such as Brazilian thin-crust shown at left, has a
very crispy crust while the medium-crust pizzas like the New York pizza in the middle are a little chewier. This pizza
features a dough with grain inclusions (see page 1:331). Bread-like pizzas have thicker crusts that can hold an array of
toppings, like the high-hydration al taglio pizza with prosciutto, ricotta, arugula, and olive oil (at right).
water provides the artisan pizzas with a wider rim
than the traditional New York pizza. Our bread-like
pizza doughs (focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, and Detroit-style) are virtually
interchangeable (see page 96).
Half of the master dough recipes (thin-crust,
New York, artisan, focaccia, and New York square)
employ a poolish (see page 1:299) in addition to
instant dry yeast. This preferment is essentially a
partially developed dough, with the flour already
hydrated and gluten development in full swing.
Adding it to the mix jump-starts overall hydration
and fermentation, which brings the benefit of
reduced mixing time, thus lessening the risk of the
dough overheating in the mixer. Preferments are
added to breads for the same reasons, and their
presence also lends a more complex flavor to a loaf
(though this slight tang can be hard to detect in pizza
dough because the toppings may mask the flavor).
Generally speaking, the bread-like doughs have
higher hydration than the thin-crust doughs. The
master recipes for the thin- and medium-crust
doughs max out at 72% (artisan pizza dough), while
the hydration of the bread-like doughs ranges from
70.43 for Detroit-style all the way up to 86.87
for focaccia. This amped-up hydration creates an
open crumb that offsets the thickness of the crust,
making it airier than it first appears. Pick up a piece
and you'll be surprised by how light it is. Because
of their higher hydration, though, these doughs are
harder to mix and shape.
We have found that the commercial planetary
and spiral mixers give the best results when mixing
the majority of the doughs. The bread-like doughs
take a particularly long time to mix in a fork mixer,
so its use is not typically recommended. We like the
diving arm mixer for certain doughs that aren't very
high in hydration. You should use a stand mixer only
if you are making smaller batches.
Machine mixing is recommended; you
can mix by hand ifyou prefer, but it's
going to take some real muscle (see
page 45). The one downside to machine
mixing is the danger of the dough overheating from friction; ideally you want
the temperature of the dough between
24°C/75°F and 25.5°C/78°Fwhen it
comes off the mixer.
Each ofthe master recipes provides
mixing instructions for the commercial
planetary mixer, spiral mixer, stand
mixer, diving arm mixer, fork mixer, and
food processor, when applicable. They
are listed in the order that we recommend for each dough.
For more on mixers, see page 37-38.
7
For more on our experiments with types
and amount of fats in thin-crust pizza dough
and Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough, see
page 1:318.
For more on the variety of thin-crust
pizzas that we found during our travels,
see page 1:126.
It's worth noting that some pizza styles
do not seem to have a single canon
ical dough recipe.We found widely
different pizzas for both deep-dish and
thin-crust. We found that the super-thin
pizzas that we ate in Brazil, the various
parts of the Midwest, and the Northeastern seaboard, and some attributed
to Rome (see page 1:168) had very little
in common in the dough or pizza, apart
from being super-thin. See pages 96-99
for our cross-crusting recommendations.
We recommend docking our Brazilian thincrust pizza dough (see photo below and next
page, above). Poking small holes in the dough
keeps it from puffing up too much in the oven.
That way it can maintain its signature thin
crust (see page 3:12 for shaping instructions).
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Thin-crust pizza is commonly found in Chicago and
other Midwest cities (its cousins, bar pie and tavern
pizza, are also found in the Midwest and along the
Northeastern seaboard; see page 1:105). The dough
stretches easily, is typically shaped with a rolling pin
rather than by hand, and bakes to a cracker-like consistency. The pizza has a little bit of a rim and that
gets the crunchiest. An idiosyncrasy of thin-crust is
that even though it is a round pizza, iť's often served
cut into squares (see page 3:300), a method we find
impractical for eating. You don't have to cut it that
way, though.
One of the problems, as we see it, with the
thin-crust pizzas served in Chicago pizzerias is that
they are often made with deep-dish-style dough (we
found that pizzerias offer both styles ofpizza but
make them with the same dough), which can take
two forms: a biscuit-like dough prepared with a soft
flour or a stronger dough enriched with shortening
or butter. In our opinion, neither delivers satisfying
results when used for a thin-crust pizza.
So we went about creating our own dough, one
meant to be rolled out thin but sturdy enough to
handle its toppings and still yield a great crunch.
Thin-crust has a crunchy, but not cracker-like, rim
that doesn't inflate. Some places won't even leave the
rim exposed; in Chicago they cover it completely with
sauce and cheese. We also wanted a dough that can be
used the same day you make it, ifyou choose to.
We included about 10% cornmeal in the mix
(it's a traditional ingredient in thin-crust pizza).
Because this dough doesn't necessarily reap the
benefits ofa long cold-proof (it proofs for 1/½ hours
at room temperature), we significantly increased
the percentage of yeast (0.82 ). The hydration
is on the high side (72%), which means it takes
some time to mix, so it's particularly important
that the water be the right temperature to prevent
overheating.
The result is a crust that is sturdy and crunchy
and has great flavor. Our one caveat: because you are
rolling this dough so thin (6 mm/14 in), be sure to
use fine-ground cornmeal in the dough-anything
coarser and you run the risk of it ripping the dough
as you roll. The other downside ofvery coarse
cornmeal is that if it doesn't absorb enough moisture
from the dough, it can be too crunchy to chew easily.
If all you have is coarse-ground cornmeal, run it
through a food processor or spice grinder first.
84 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA
DOUGH
One of the most prevalent styles of pizza in Brazil
is thin crust. The dough is made with a low-protein
flour, which makes it very easy to roll out and stretch
because there isn't any real pullback. The rim puffs
up a little, like a cracker would. It even has a bit of a
cracker-like texture, which is desirable, but when you
cut a slice, it'll hold the plank. The base, while firm,
is not crunchy. Although there are some other styles
being made in Brazil (like Neapolitan, something
similar to New York, and even artisan), they're not
exclusively Brazilian-style pizza.
Most Brazilian pizzas are larger and made for
sharing. We were surprised to find that service for
this pizza is very formal in São Paulo. A server gives
you a slice (you don't grab it from a tray), and the
pizzerias look like semi-fancy restaurants. And,
interestingly, it is almost impossible to find a pizzeria
that is open for lunch. Pizza is a dinner food, period
(see page 1:190).
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
We discuss our deep-dish pizza dough near our
thin-crust pizza doughs for a reason. It turns out that
the "deep" part of deep-dish pizza consists mostly of
the copious toppings, while the dough itselfis pretty
thin. As with our Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see
page 110), this dough includes a bit of cornmeal,
characteristic of the deep-dish pizzas that Chicago is
famous for.
This deep-dish dough does not use a poolish and
includes both butter and lard, which makes sense
when you consider that deep-dish pizza is more akin
to a quiche than a pizza. (We decided to make a
hybrid of the two; see our recipe for Quizza on page
3:102.) The dough is mixed to full gluten development, has a bench rest of 20 minutes, and proofs at
room temperature for 1½ hours, so you can make it
the same day you want to serve pizza. For those with
the time, we have found that cold-proofing for a day
will yield a crispier, even better-tasting crust.
We wanted to pay homage to Pizzeria Uno in
Chicago, which originated the deep-dish style, so
we also developed an enriched dough that has more
than four times the amount of fat of our master
deep-dish pizza dough. This enrichment provides a
flaky crust similar to pie dough that won't get soggy
under the thick layer of toppings and sauce.
For more on how we replicated an iconic
Brazilian flour, see page 1:277.
For more on Pizzeria Uno, see page 1:245.
You can use a rolling pin to remove any excess
dough around the top of the pan when you
shape deep-dish pizza dough (see page 3:88).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 85
7
The fork mixer (see photo below) is not
widely available in the United States
but is the mixer of choice for some
Neapolitan pizzaioli to make traditional
Neapolitan pizza dough (see page 38).
We have found that you can achieve
better results with other commercial
planetary mixers, and that pizzaioli in
Naples use other mixers as well.
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
The original pizza (see page 1:12), Neapolitan
pizza is traditionally baked in a scorching-hot oven
(usually wood fired, at temperatures of 450-480°C/
840-900° F). The heat of the oven creates the smallto medium-sized charred bubbles around the rim
ofthe crust, known as leoparding, which are the
hallmark of this style.
In Naples, with few exceptions, the dough
contains only four ingredients: flour, water, yeast,
and salt. The amount of water in the dough is kept
intentionally low because the more water a dough
contains, the longer it will take to bake. When
baking in an extremely hot oven, the crust needs
to bake through in less than 2 minutes (more often
60-90 seconds)-any longer and it will burn. But
the amount of water also has to be sufficient to provide the lift needed to inflate the air bubbles in the
dough, resulting in those open and irregular alveoli
(bubbles) that define this crust (see page 3:35).
For pizzas baked at lower (though still hot)
temperatures (285-340°C / 550–650°F), it takes
a little while for the dough to heat up and bake.
Initially (and very briefly), the yeast is very happy
with this warming environment, and there is a final
burst of activity that produces carbon dioxide and
ethanol, which helps inflate the air bubbles in the
dough. This continues until the temperature rises to
50-60°C/ 122–140°F and the yeast dies, at which
point the steam being produced by the evaporating
water takes over the task. In a 480°C / 900°F oven,
the yeast dies very quickly, and the majority of the
inflation in the dough will come from steam. So
for Neapolitan pizza, the amount of water in the
dough needs to hit a sweet spot-not so much that it
increases the bake time, but just enough to produce
steam to fully inflate the bubbles in the dough.
Because the proper degree of hydration is so
important to this pizza, so is the flour. Almost all pizzaioli in Naples use a semistrong 00 flour, but more
While we recommend machine mixing for our
pizza doughs, Franco Pepe, one of the most
lauded pizzaioli in the world, mixes all of his
doughs by hand (see page 47).
86 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
and more are combining it or replacing it with Tipo
0, or even Tipo 1 and Tipo 2 flour, to develop their
own flavor and texture profiles. It has become such
a trend that the AVPN has started to allow these
non-00 flours, as well as the use of sourdough starter
(levain), as acceptable in their (semi) strict criteria
for making "true" Neapolitan pizza (see page 3:43).
Nearly all Neapolitan pizzaioli use fresh yeast, and
most use a fork mixer to make their dough. But they
do differ in the order in which they mix the ingredients, whether or for how long they bulk ferment, and
how long they proof. Room-temperature proofing is
traditional in Naples, while cold-proofing is prevalent
in the rest of Italy and much of the world (see page
88). For those who bulk ferment, it can be anywhere
from 5-10 hours, and proofing times range from 2-24
hours. The goal of bulkfermenting is both to ferment
the dough and to convert the maximum amount of
starches from complex to simple sugars to serve as
food for the yeast. This is crucial to achieving proper
proofing and eventual baking during Neapolitan
pizza's very short time in the oven.
How does our Neapolitan pizza dough stack
up against the traditional doughs made in Naples?
They are relatively similar in ingredient proportions, but we use instant dry yeast. Our feeling is
that the use of fresh yeast in Naples is driven by
custom; many of these pizzerias have been run by
the same family for generations, and using fresh
yeast is simply the way they have always done itthe yeast is part of their history. We, on the other
hand, are not constrained by that. Instant dry yeast
is much more stable, has a longer shelf life, and is
more reliable and convenient to store than fresh.
Also, there is no flavor difference-it's the same
strain ofyeast (see page 1:292).
The method we use for our dough, however, is
completely different from what we saw in Naples.
It is the result of an extensive experiment where
we tested different methods and times for mixing,
bulk fermenting, and proofing Neapolitan pizza
doughs (see page 88). Our best result came from a
dough that was mixed to full gluten development,
bulk fermented at room temperature for 20-24
hours, balled, and then proofed and relaxed for 3
more hours at room temperature. The relatively
low-hydration crust (62.3) had great flavor and a
large rim with a very open crumb. Because we want
to offer choices, we have also included an AVPN
Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page 130) and a
Neapolitan-style pizza dough that contains a poolish
and is cold-proofed (see page 128). The addition
of the poolish (see page 1:299) is to aid in the full
hydration of the flour and to improve its texture
and baking properties. Proofing in the refrigerator
minimizes the risk of overproofing while still adding
the benefits of full hydration and the breakdown of
starches into sugars.
In Italy, there is an obsession with
digestibility, specifically in regard to
Neapolitan pizza (see page 1:133). This
"digestibility"is attributed to long
fermentations and the type of flour
used in the pizza; it is said that you can
eat a whole Neapolitan pizza and be
ready for more 10 minutes later.We're not sure what this is based on, but if you
want to eat several Neapolitan pizzas in
an afternoon, who are we to judge?
For more on the differences between Tipо О,
Tipo 1, and Tipo 2 flour, see page 1:278.
While "true" Neapolitan pizza is
supposed to be soft (see page 1:97),
it shouldn't be soggy or soupy in the
middle. Even the pizzaioli that we interviewed in Naples agree that sogginess
is a flaw.
Neapolitan Pizza Dough with Poolish
(see page 128)
AVPN Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page 130)
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
Modernist High-Hydration Neapolitan
Pizza Dough (see page 127)
87
7
EXPERIMENT
IS THERE A RIGHT WAY TO PROOF NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH?
One of the biggest surprises that we found as we traveled throughout Italy was the difference in proofing times and temperatures for
Neapolitan pizza dough. We expected the methods for making this
iconic dough to be roughly the same no matter where we went, but
we found that it was proofed at room temperature in Naples and coldproofed pretty much everywhere else. We also found an even bigger
variance in the methods used by the more established pizzaioli and the
newer people on the block. When we got home, we decided to experiment with the two proofing methods to see if it made a difference.
We created a nine-part experiment that changed singular variables
at several steps and led to a staggering number of result permutations.
We mixed the dough to shaggy mass or full gluten development, bench
rested or bulk fermented it, and proofed the dough at room temperature or under refrigeration. We used the methods that we documented
during our travels as our starting point and ended up with a method for
our master Neapolitan pizza dough that gives a fantastic result. We are
explainingall ofthis because our master recipe reflects our own method.
It doesn't match any of the great pizzerias in Naples and it doesn't have
to be yours. But you also don't have to be constrained by the traditional
rules surrounding Neapolitan pizza. To that point, we didn't visit a single
pizzeria in Naples that followed the AVPN rules to a tee (see page 3:43).
We found that there wasn't a single right or wrong pizza in Naples; you
can make your own choice.
We developed a typical Neapolitan recipe with a poolish and 2-day coldproofing stage (see photo at left). But then we started tinkering to see if we
could improve it. Bulk fermenting the dough for 1 day at room temperature
before balling and baking caused the rim of the dough to pillow, but we
struggled to stretch out the dough.We tried resting the dough for 2, 3, and
4 hours after bulk fermenting. The 3-hour resting time provided the best
result, and then we added dough relaxers to make shaping a little easier.
This gave us our final Neapolitan dough recipe (see photo at far right).
When the dough is mixed to full gluten development (see photo at left, above) rather than to a shaggy mass (see photo at right,
above), the crumb is much tighter and the crust color is darker.
We shaped the dough into a ball before bulk fermenting (see photo at left, above). When we balled the dough after bulk fermenting (see photo at right, above), it was difficult to shape the dough and keep the center area from getting too thin. It also tended
to rip in the oven during baking.
A dough with a smallamount of yeast needs more time to cold-proof because the lower temperature slows its development (seе
photo at right, above). A dough with the same amount of yeast that is proofed at room temperature for the same amount of time
overproofs, resulting in a deflated rim crust that is overly browned (see photo at left, above).
88 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
(see page 124)
Proofing Neapolitan Pizza Dough in Naples
In the city of Naples, all the top pizzaioli that we talked to proofed their
doughs at room temperature (see photo above). The research that we
had done and our experience with Neapolitan dough in the United
States suggested that the Neapolitans cold-proofed and used much more
yeast in their dough. But, for some curious reason, we found that they
were proofing the dough for up to 1 day in a non-air-conditioned space,
which can vary a lot in temperature, and they used a minuscule amount
of yeast (some even claimed to not add yeast to their dough; see page
1:297). They simply used their vast experience to compensate for any
variations in proofing or baking.
The question we kept asking ourselves was why they wouldn't control
the temperature if that resulted in a more reliable dough, especially
Proofing Neapolitan Pizza Dough in the Rest of Italy
We came across a very different scenario when we ventured outside of
Naples. Even though virtually all of the pizzaioli hailed from Campania
(of which Naples is the capital), almost none of them proofed their
dough at ambient temperature (see photo at right). And most of them
were surprised that we even asked why they cold-proofed their dough.
These pizzaioli are credentialed (all of them rank in the Tre Spicchi
category in the Gambero Rosso guide; see page 1:152), and though some
ofthem make different pizza styles, many of them rival the best pizzas
we ate in Naples. They also have their own style of Neapolitan, which
is crispier and has a browner rim than the cornicione that we found in
Naples. There isn't a single style that rules outside of Naples, but the
pizzerias are serving what their customers want.
considering the length of the proofing time. And to confound matters
even further, the AVPN rules specify that the dough should be proofed
in a temperature-controlled room. That said, the Neapolitan pizzaioli
ultimately have the experience to cope with their dough, and we can't
blame the AVPN for suggesting temperature control to people who are
getting newly certified to make Neapolitan pizza.
Proper storage during proofing is crucial to the final result (see Final Proofing,
page 65). If you are making multiple pizza dough balls, be sure to allow enough
room for them to expand. Leaving about 5 cm/2 in of space between the balls of
dough should be sufficient.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 89
7
Just 75 miles from Manhattan is
New Haven, home of the distinctive
medium-crust apizza style (see page
1:228). We have included a traditional
version of the pizza dough as well as
our take on this style of pizza that is
beloved by its die-hard fans.
During our pizza research, we observed that
some pizzaioli would cut open the top of their
dough so that they could inspect the fermentation going on under the surface of the dough
(see photo at left, below).
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
On some level, we think of New York pizza as a
Neapolitan pizza adapted for commerce. Neapolitan
pizza is meant to be eaten within a maximum of 10
minutes after it comes out of the oven. Time is not
kind to it. New York pizza, on the other hand, has a
sturdy, slightly thicker crust that can be made larger
to serve multiple people by the slice (we provide
guidelines for making pizzas from 35-60 cm/
14–24 in. in diameter; see page 132). It can handle
the weight of more toppings and stand up to an hour
under a heat lamp. It reheats with little diminishment of quality and transports well in a box. It's also
meant to be baked at a lower temperature than the
Neapolitan pizza (285–315°C/ 550–600° F), so a
wood-fired pizza oven is not a necessity (although it
is certainly a possibility; see page 3:72).
We formulated and tested our master recipe until
the crust had the qualities we were searching for:
chewy-crispy, thicker than Neapolitan without being
bread-like, and with enough structure to handle
more toppings. Because this crust is thicker and
bakes at a lower temperature for a longer time, we
upped the hydration on the dough (69.49% versus
62.3% for the Neapolitan) to help open up the
crumb for the desired result.
Like our Neapolitan Pizza Dough with Poolish
(see page 128),the dough uses u a poolish, and for the
same reasons. In addition to the flour, water, yeast,
and salt, it includes diastatic malt powder and a small
amount of olive oil. The malt powder provides food
to sustain the yeast during the long fermentation
time. The oil helps add volume to the dough, resulting in a fluffier texture; it also makes the dough a bit
easier to work with and keeps the crust from drying
out when you reheat it.
One ofthe big challenges with making New York
pizza dough is its size. The bigger the ball of dough,
the more unwieldy it is to work with. For home
cooks, we recommend making a 35 cm / 14 in pizza.
But the dough for 35 cm and 40 cm / 14 in and 16 in
pizzas weighs 400 g and 600 g, respectively, and the
minimum weight that can be properly mixed in a
stand mixer is 800 g. We recommend that you make
at least that amount, use what you need, and save
the rest for the next day (or make a second pizza
and freeze it; see page 3:331). Also, for pizza over 50
cm / 20 in, if you are using a tub for proofing, make
sure you have one large enough to accommodate the
increased amount of dough.
90 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
A New York slice from Brooklyn Pizza Crew
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
In doing our field research on the different types of
pizza, we identified a category that we came to call
artisan (see page 1:38). It has the bubbly, organic
look of Neapolitan pizza (but with a crust that is
browned but not leoparded) and the texture and
thickness of New York pizza (though some pizzerias
make it a bit thinner). We found a version in virtually every city that we visited.
Because the crust is thicker than a Neapolitan
pizza, it needs more time in the oven, which
means a lower baking temperature (250-315°C/
485-600°F) to prevent burning. To ensure big bubbles around the rim of the crust, our master dough
has a higher hydration (72) than both the Neapolitan pizza dough and the New York pizza dough,
which creates more steam to enlarge the bubbles. It
contains a small percentage of olive oil, which makes
it easier for the bubbles in the dough to expand (see
page 142). We also added diastatic malt powder to
give the yeast extra fuel in an effort to up the size of
the bubbles in the crust.
This dough is a great option for the home baker.
It's easy to handle, fits on a baking steel in a home
oven, and produces a great-looking pizza. And
unique to this dough, we include a high-hydration
variation (see page 146) that will produce results
similar to those in trendy high-hydration breads.
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Thought by some to be the original pizza (see page
1:12), focaccia is a crispy-bottomed pan-baked
bread dressed with very minimal toppings (ifany at
all), classically just a drizzle of olive oil, a sprinkling
of salt, and maybe fresh herbs. The lack of tomato
as a topping points to its venerable age; its origin
predates the appearance of the tomato in Italian
cooking in the 17th century (see page 1:9). We
argue that this lack of sauce, along with a handful of
other factors, means it doesn't fit our definition of
pizza (see page 1:4). That said, we found that our
focaccia dough performs excellently as a crust for
bread-like pizzas (see page 96), which is why we
have chosen to include it here.
Our version is wonderfully chewy and has a very
open crumb, more than is typical of focaccia because
we based it on our ciabatta recipe from Modernist
Bread. A primary contributor to this open crumb is
the dough's high hydration, 86.87%. This provides
plenty of moisture to convert into the steam needed
to create the large alveoli in the crumb.
High-hydration doughs take longer and are
harder to mix than doughs with lower hydration.
Our focaccia recipe employs two techniques that
offset these difficulties. The first is the double
hydration mixing method (see page 41). For very
high-hydration doughs, if you were to add the
entirety of the water all at once, you would swamp
the dry ingredients. In double hydration, you hold
back a portion of the water while mixing the dough
to a shaggy mass, or low gluten development. You
then add the remaining water, along with the salt,
and continue to mix. Doing this shortens the mixing
time, makes for a more cohesive dough, and ensures
more even distribution ofthe salt through the dough
because it is dispersed in the water.
The second technique is autolyse (see page
32); once the dough is mixed to a shaggy mass, it's
allowed to rest for 30 minutes before the salt and
remaining water are added. This gives the flour the
opportunity to absorb the water, which will reduce
mixing time. The inclusion of both levain and
poolish further improves the hydration of the flour
(see Fermented Flour, page 1:298), and the levain
adds flavor, which is particularly important since this
dough is not cold-proofed.
Another factor that contributes to the open
crumb of focaccia is mixing the dough just to
medium gluten development. This is followed by a
room-temperature bulk ferment for 2½ hours, with
several four-edge folds performed until the dough
achieves full gluten development. Doing this ensures
that the dough is not overworked (which would lead
to a tighter crumb), and it also allows time for flavor
development.
For more on the introduction of the tomato to
Italian cooking, see page 1:9.
We flavored our artisan pizza dough with an
herb inclusion to create the green-hued pizza
crust shown above. If you choose to include
a puree or inclusion in your dough, make sure
that it matches the flavor profile of the pizza's
toppings. For more on dough inclusions, see
page 1:331.
For more on our experiments with how pectin
affected focaccia dough, see Turning Up the
Volume, page 1:324.
Stippling focaccia dough (and other pan-baked
pizzas) as it proofs helps to stretch it out
to evenly fill the pan without degassing the
dough too much. This bubbly dough will
produce a pizza crust with an open crumb
structure.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 91
7
Our Argentinean-Style "al Molde"
Pizza Dough (see page 170) produces a similar crust to the New
York Square Pizza Dough; it is sturdy
enough to handle the substantial
amounts of cheese found on the
traditional al molde pizza style.
We tried several versions of al taglio
around Italy and the United States
and found that there weren't unifying
qualities across the pizzas (see page
1:109). Some were displayed in a case
like Gabriele Bonci's al taglio pizza at
Pizzarium in Rome (a slice of his pizza
is shown in the photo below), but the
pizza itself didn't look or taste anything
like Bonci's. Others were served whole,
for the diners to cut with scissors o
baked with toppings like Angelo lezzi
(see page 1:109).
NEW YORK SQUARE
PIZZA DOUGH
Our New York square pizza is called Sicilian pizza
in some areas. It's purely an American creation,
and we found that this style of pizza doesn't have a
singular definition or execution (see page 1:101).
We created a version of this pizza that improves on
what we saw at the pizzerias in New York City; like
the originals, it's topped with tomato sauce, cheese,
and other ingredients and baked in a rectangular
pan until the bottom is brown and crispy. While it is
not something you will find anywhere in Sicily, its
creator may have found inspiration in the Sicilian
flatbread sfincione (see page 3:125). It is topped
with tomato sauce, aged caciocavallo cheese, and
bread crumbs and baked in a square pan, making it a
distant relative that differs quite a bit in the crust.
Like the other bread-like doughs in this chapter,
the New York square pizza dough produces a light,
airy crust. It has lower hydration than focaccia
(74.68%) and employs a poolish and instant dry
yeast; as a result, it has a slightly tighter crumb than
focaccia. Autolyse is used to increase the water
absorption by the flour before the dough is mixed
to medium gluten development, but the hydration
percentage is not high enough to make double
hydration necessary (see page 41). Like focaccia,
this dough is bulk fermented at room temperature
for 2/½ hours, with folds performed until the gluten
is fully developed.
New York square pizza dough's lower hydration
makes it harder to shape into the pan; the only
counsel we give here is patience. You'll be tempted
to overstretch it so that it pulls back to where you
want it, but don't-you'll end up tearing the dough.
Stretch it, let it rest for 10 to 15 minutes to relax the
gluten, stretch it again, and repeat until the dough
fits the pan.
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
PIZZA DOUGH
The person who inspired many pizzaioli to make
Roman al taglio pizza is Gabriele Bonci, and his
style is one of our inspirations as we developed our
recipe for al taglio pizza. This dough produces an
incredibly light and airy crust with a chewy texture
and very crispy bottom. The toppings are limited
only by your imagination and, depending on the
ingredients, can be put on the pizza before baking or
after it comes out of the oven.
This dough has the second-highest hydration
of the bread-like pizza doughs, 81.08%, which is
a primary contributor to its open crumb. Double
hydration is used, shortening the mixing time, and it
is also autolysed like the other pan-baked pizzas with
high hydration (Detroit-style pizza is the exception
to this rule). We like using 00 flour in this recipe. It
yields a very supple dough that has both elasticity
and extensibility; you can stretch it without ripping
it. Make the same dough with American bread flour
and it snaps back like a rubber band.
Pizza gourmet is a style slightly similar to
al taglio pizza in that both pizzas are baked (or
steamed), then topped with any variety of toppings
before serving. The similarities pretty much end
there (the dough, shape, assembly, and presentation are totally different), but we are including
a recipe for our interpretation of pizza gourmet
dough in the high-hydration al taglio pizza section.
Also included in that section is a recipe for Roman
Pizza alla Pala Dough (see page 164).
The term "al taglio" means "by the cut," and al taglio pizza,
which is becoming increasingly popular in the United
States (see page 1:109), is sold by the piece. In Rome,
depending on the pizzeria, you can order it by weight (200
g, for instance) or by the exact size piece you want.
Modernist New York square pizza
with prawns, scallops, calamari,
capers, and fresh parsley
92 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
You can't talk about Detroit-style pizza without
talking about cheese. The crust has the light, airy
crumb and crispy bottom characteristic of all the
bread-like pizza crusts. What differentiates a Detroitstyle pizza is that the edge ofthe dough is bordered
with cheese, applied so that it comes right up against
the sides of the baking pan. In the oven, the cheese
melts and bakes into a golden-brown, crunchy crust.
The best pieces to get are the corners since they have
two crispy sides to them, but the center ones are still
plenty delicious.
And not any cheese will do. For a traditional
Detroit-style experience, it has to be Wisconsin brick
cheese mixed in equal parts with pizza cheese or cheddar cheese. Wisconsin brick cheese has a rich flavor
best described as being like melted butter. If you can't
find brick cheese, use a combination of white cheddar
and mozzarella.
While the other bread-like pizza doughs require
a preferment, our Detroit-style master dough can
be made from start to finish on the day you want
your pizza. After being mixed to nearly full gluten
development, it gets two 15-minute bench rests
separated by a four-edge fold. This allows the
gluten strands to relax, making it easier to fit the
dough into the pan. This is also the only one of our
bread-like pizzas that is baked to order-all the
others are baked ahead and then reheated-but
this one can also be easily reheated with positive
results (see page 3:312).
Another distinguishing characteristic of Detroitstyle pizza is the inclusion ofsemolina flour (about
151%) along with the bread flour, which adds
flavor, gives the dough a nice color, and makes it
a bit easier to handle since semolina contains less
gluten-forming proteins. Because this is a "day of"
or direct dough, with instant yeast the only leavener,
we kick-start its fermentation in two ways: by adding
a lot more yeast (0.9%%) and by increasing the
water temperature to 30–30.5°C / 85–87°F (versus
the usual 21°C /70°F). You typically sacrifice some
flavor with a faster fermentation, but that is not the
case with this dough.
For more on the difference between durum
and semolina flours, see page 1:335.
Detroit-style pizza's signature cheese-rimmed
crust has helped this style gain popularity
in recent years (see page 1:150). We found
this particularly lacy example at Apollonia's
Pizzeria in Los Angeles, CА.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
Detroit-style pizza dough (left) is traditionally
baked in black steel pans (above) that were
originally used in the automotive industry. We
recommend buying cured steel pans to make
it easier to remove the pizza from the pan. See
Resources, page 3:377.
93
7
BEST BETS FOR PIZZA SIZES
Most pizza sizes are dictated by the standard pans that are available.
We used these measurements to guide the development of our pizza
sizes and dough ball weights. Of course, we've seen myriad shapes and
sizes being served in pizzerias around the world, including Neapolitan
pizzas that are so large they hang over the edge of the plate. If you
don't find the size you want in the table below, you can scale the dough
to your desired dimensions using the recipe conversion factor formula
on page 21.
Dough typе Dough weight Pizza size Pan size
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
275 g
40 cm/16 in n/a
370 g
50 cm/20 in
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
125 g 23 cm/9 in n/a
250 g
40 cm/16 in
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
230 g
700 g
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
250 g
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
400 g
n/a
21 cm/8½ in
32 cm/12/½ in
30 cm/12 in
35 cm/14 in
21 cm by 5 cm deep / 81/2 in by 2 in
32 cm by 5 cm deep /12½ in by 2 in
n/a
600 g
40 cm/16 in
800 g 45 cm/18 in
930 g 50 cm/20 in
1.1kg 55 cm/22 in
1.2 kg 60 cm/24 in
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
360 g
35 cm/14 in n/a
400 g
40 cm/16 in
470 g
45 cm/18 in
500 g
50 cm/20 in
580 g
55 cm/22 in
620 g
60 cm/24 in
Focaccia Dough
see page 148
1 kg half sheet pan 46 cm by 33 cm/18 in by 13 in
New York Square Pizza Dough
see page 152
700 g half sheet pan 46 cm by 33 cm /18 in by 13 in
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough
see page 158
700 g half Roman al taglio pan 60 cm by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in
1.4 kg full Roman al taglio pan 60 cm by 40 cm /24 in by 16 in
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
330 g half Detroit pan 25 cm by 20 cm/10 in by 8 in
500 g full Detroit pan 35 cm by 25 cm /14 in by 10 in
94 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THE RESULTS OF OUR PIZZA EXPERIMENT TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS
When we started developing the list of experiments for Modernist Pizza,
we looked at what we tested for Modernist Bread that might translate to
pizza dough. The goal was to simplify what we could to produce the best
possible doughs.While some pizza experiments performed as expected,
DOUGH CPR
We were able to utilize our dough CPR method
from Modernist Bread (see page 77) in combination with dough relaxers to develop a
Neapolitan dough that would still work after it
was overproofed. Simply reball the Neapolitan
Pizza Dough master on page 124, relax the
dough for a few hours, and shape it, and you
will still obtain an airy cornicione. This technique works for pizzas that are not baked in a
pan. If you try to reball pizzas baked in a pan, it
becomes difficult to stretch the dough into the
corners of the pan.
PECTIN
We were excited to try pectin both in pizzas
with an airy rim, like the canotto pizza, and
in bread-like pizza with an open crumb. We
expected pectin to give us the same volume
increase that we saw in several of the breads
in Modernist Bread. With the exception of
focaccia, however, we were unable to see a
difference in the volumes of any of our master
recipes.
FATS AND OILS
others surprised us. Following are the results that provided some of the
best tips, which we included in the recipes-and others that were mysteries to us.
We thought we might be able to achieve
brioche-level amounts of fat in our pizza
doughs (around 50) to make a decadent,
flavorful base for a pizza. While we did test a
dough with 50 solid fat, our favorite dough
with a high fat percentage was our 30 Fat
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 117).
We also succeeded with incorporating 10
liquid or solid fat in the New York Pizza Dough
(see page 132), Artisan Pizza Dough (see page
142), Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 110),
Focaccia Dough (see page 148), and New York
Square Pizza Dough (see page 152). You can
include up to 5 for Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
(see page 166) and Neapolitan Pizza Dough
(see page 124).
DOUGH RELAXERS
Not surprisingly, we were able to shape our
pan-baked pizzas more easily and make sure
that the dough was pushed into the sharp
corners of the pan with the addition of a dough
relaxer. We have recommendations for dough
relaxers in each of the Modernist variations
in the chapter and discuss the role of dough
relaxers on page 1:327.
DIASTATIC MALT POWDER AND
MALTED BARLEY SYRUP
We initially formulated our thin-crust recipe
with diastatic malt powder and malt syrup
because many recipes that we found in our
research contained those ingredients. During
subsequent experimentation, however, we
found that their impact was negligible, so we
took them out. But our experiments reinforced
the usefulness of these ingredients in the
browning and crispiness of the New York and
artisan pizzas.
POLYDEXTROSE
We achieved the greatest success when adding
polydextrose to our Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
(see page 110), Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough (see page 114), and Deep-Dish Pizza
Dough (see page 118). The amount of toppings
on these tends to make them soggy, but the
polydextrose helped keep them crispier (see
page 1:329).
We fashioned an extensograph to measure how far dough
can be stretched until it breaks, or its extensibility (see page
1:322). The dough's extensibility and resistance to extension
give you an idea of the strength of the gluten network as well
as how easy it will be to shape.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 95
7
EXPERIMENT
CROSS-CRUSTING OUR MASTER DOUGHS
There are people who feel strongly that certain dough recipes are
required for making specific styles of pizza. In the case of Neapolitan
pizza, the AVPN has very strict rules about this (see page 3:43). We
wondered what would happen if you used the "wrong"type of dough.
We were pretty sure that the pizza wouldn't jump out of the oven, but
we wanted to see if we could get good results ifwe "cross-crusted." The
answer is a resounding yes.
When we take a close look at what our master recipes are made up
of, it's not hard to imagine that they could be used to make other styles of
pizza as well. In some instances, it seems obvious, as with focaccia, which
could be used for any pizza baked in a pan. But other substitutions, such as
Neapolitan pizza dough used for a deep-dish pizza crust, took us by surprise.
Another surprise for us when we experimented with cross-crusting
was how tolerant the doughs were of being baked at alternate temperatures. Our initial thought was that Neapolitan dough was only formulated
for high-heat ovens, but it worked at lower temperatures, like those
found in home ovens, too. The resulting pizza won't have the characteristic leoparding on the crust and it'll be crispier, but it's still delicious.
Why would you want to do any of this? Because it allows you to
make a wider array of pizza styles with one dough (and considerably less
effort), whether you own a pizzeria or are entertaining people with
a pizza bar.
After mixing and bulk fermenting each master dough, we followed
the dividing, shaping, proofing, and baking instructions dictated by the
style of pizza the dough was being adapted for. When we substituted the
different doughs, we used the amounts of dough, sauce, and toppings
that were recommended for the cross-tested master recipe.
We were excited to discover that most of the pizza doughs we tested
were able to adapt to the conditions of other pizzas' assembly and baking
instructions. For example, all the bread-like pizza doughs were interchangeable with great results. These same doughs were too slack to handle, however, when we tried to use them for medium- or thin-crust pizzas.
Conversely, when we made our deep-dish and thin-crust pizzas with
bread-like doughs, the experiment worked-we got a finished pizza-but
it wasn't quite the same.We found that high-hydration dough makes
good low-hydration pizzas. We were less surprised to find that the
opposite wasn't true and that the Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough made a
terrible focaccia.
Of course, ifyou expect a specific flavor component (our thin-crust and
deep-dish masters have cornmeal), then you won't get that flavor when you
cross-crust. That said, there are plenty of thin-crust and deep-dish pizza
recipes without cornmeal that are also delicious.
You shouldn't get too hung up on using a specific type of dough for
a certain pizza style because pizza is pretty forgiving. If you have X pizza
dough and you want to make Y style, it's much more possible than you
think. We believe strongly in the inventiveness of home chefs and pizzaioli. These cross-crusting combinations encourage your own kinds of
pizzas and variations.
THIN-CRUST PIZZA
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Crust is more cracker-like
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
More oven spring; crispy crust with good flavor
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crust texture but still crunchy; recommend 3 min baking time
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crust texture but still crunchy; recommend 3 min baking time
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
Shapes well, especially if the dough is cold;
different overall texture
DEEP-DISH PIZZA
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Shapes well, especially if the dough is cold;
different overall texture
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Shapes well, especially if the dough is cold;
final crust is slightly thinner
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Initial crust crispiness with good flavor; softens slightly
quicker after baking
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Initial crust crispiness; softens very quickly after baking:
recommended size of 25-27.5 cm/10-11 in
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Crust crispiness that holds well; recommended size of
25-27.5 cm/10-11 in
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEW YORK PIZZA
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; crunchier crust
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar; recommend 5%-6 min baking
time
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Crispy crust: recommend 6 min baking time
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Much flakier and crunchier crust; recommend
6 min baking time
CONTINUED ON PAGE 98
7
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; crunchier crust
ARTISAN PIZZA
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Crispy crust; tangy sour flavor; recommend
6 min baking time
FOCACCIA
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Much flakier and crunchier crust; recommend
6 min baking time
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
Comparable crumb; requires
30 min additional proofing
time
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Denser crumb, reminiscent of
soft bread; recommend 13 min
baking time
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Significantly different than
focaccia but with pleasant
bread texture; recommend
9-12 min of baking time
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
DOUGH
Similar to restaurant-style
focaccia; denser crumb,
reminiscent of soft bread
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA
DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; crispy
crust with good flavor
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Comparable crumb with
good flavor; requires 30 min
additional proofing time
Slightly denser crumb; recommend baking on the oven floor
for 2 min for a crispy bottom
crust
Slightly denser crumb; recommend baking on the oven floor
for 2 min for a crispy bottom
crust
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; recommend baking on the oven floor
for 2 min for a crispy bottom
crust
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
PIZZA DOUGH
Very similar; slightly lighter
mouthfeel
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Very similar
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO PIZZA
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; similar crust
crispiness; recommend 9 min baking
time
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; similar crust
crispiness; recommend 9 min baking
time
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
Much tighter crumb but with higher
volume; crispy bottom crust
RECOMMENDED DOUGH SUBSTITUTIONS
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Very similar; slightly lighter crumb
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser and chewier crumb;
similar crust crispiness
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Slightly denser crumb; crispy crust with good
flavor
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO PIZZA DOUGH
Much more open crumb; baked cheese adds
crunchiness
FOCACCIA DOUGH
Much more open crumb; baked cheese adds
crunchiness
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Much more open crumb; baked cheese adds
crunchiness
THE FAILURES
Not all of our experiments in cross-crusting were successful. The low
hydration of the Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough creates a dense, pale,
dry crust when it's baked as a focaccia. When we baked Neapolitan pizza
dough as a Detroit-style pizza, the flavor was decent but it deflated when
it came out of the oven, which produced a dense, chewy crust. Our
Detroit-style pizza dough works well to shape as a New York pizza, but
the texture of the crust is overly crunchy and a bit dense. The high hydration of the high-hydration al taglio pizza dough creates a Neapolitan
pizza with a slightly gummy rim crust and excessive leoparding.
FOCACCIA BAKED WITH BRAZILIAN
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA BAKED WITH
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
NEW YORK PIZZA BAKED WITH
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA BAKED WITH HIGHHYDRATION AL TAGLIO PIZZA DOUGH
7
We developed a method using pregelatinized
starch that allows us to make a high-hydration
Neapolitan pizza (see page 127). Its rim crust
is similar to the canotto-style pizzas thatwe
found in Italy during our pizza travels.
Direct doughs don't contain a prefer ment (typically they contain just flour, water, salt, and
yeast). Although the flavor of a direct dough
isn't as developed as that of a dough with a
preferment, it is much faster to make.
OUR VARIATIONS
For each of the pizza categories, we have developed
a set of variations that alter the ingredients and/or
dough preparation techniques found in the master
recipes. Though these variations are tailored to
each particular pizza dough, their purpose in flavor
and technique is largely the same, so we include
an overview of each of them here. You'll find the
Modernist, Direct, and Emergency variations
grouped with most of the master types of dough.
The other recipes are grouped by variation after the
master doughs (see page 172).
MODERNIST
The goal of the majority of these recipes was to
make a dough that is easy to stretch, roll out, or
shape in the pan so that the dough stays in place,
particularly in the corners where you want a sharp
angle. We accomplished this by adding a minuscule
amount of dough relaxer (although we don't have
dough relaxers in every Modernist dough). We add
the relaxer with either the water or the flour in the
recipe, depending on whether the relaxer is fruit
juice (pineapple, kiwi, or papaya, each of which
contains an enzyme that breaks down proteins) or
bromelain, papain, or meat tenderizer, the powdered
versions of those enzymes. In the initial testing,
we found that adding the dough relaxer sometimes
yielded a less crispy crust, so we compensated by
adding diastatic malt powder and/or polydextrose,
depending on the recipe, to restore that crunchiness.
We also added a little pectin to several of the master
recipes to increase the volume of the dough. Ofnote is that our master Neapolitan pizza dough contains
a dough relaxer. We liked the result so much that we
made the Modernist variation into the master recipe
and then created a Modernist Neapolitan pizza
dough that allows you to achieve higher hydration
than the master recipe (see page 127).
DIRECТ
If you want your pizza and you want it now (or,
rather, today), this is your recipe. There is no preferment and no long bulk ferment or cold-proofing.
Some of our master recipes are direct to begin with,
like Neapolitan and Detroit-style, but many of them
contain some form of preferment. Mix the ingredients to full gluten development, give the dough
a short bench rest to relax the gluten, then divide,
shape, and proof at room temperature, and you're
ready to make pizza. You can, if you like, also coldproof this dough for 1-2 days to yield even better
baking and texture results.
EMERGENCY PIZZA DOUGH
These doughs aim to give you a dough even faster
than the Direct variations of some of the master
recipes. We typically achieve this by increasing the
amount of yeast, mixing the dough with warmer
water, and decreasing the proofing times (other
time-saving tips can be found on pages 16-17). You
will lose some complexity of flavor, volume, and
texture when compared to the master recipes, but
you will still end up with a delicious pizza if you find
yourself short on time.
LEVAIN RAISED
This crust is for fans of sourdough. The technique
is exactly the same as for the master recipes, except
that you substitute mature liquid levain for the leavener(s) used and adjust the flour and water amounts
in the dough to account for the flour and water in
the levain. If you're making your levain from scratch
(that is, if you don't already have it on hand), it'll
take at least 5 days to get it up and running, so plan
accordingly. This variation produces a crust with
great depth of flavor that presents well even when
loaded with toppings.
SECOND CHANCE
One of the great discoveries from Modernist Bread
was that you can make use of leftover liquid levain
that either is overripe or has been frozen for several
weeks and then thawed. Either way, the levain is
inactive, having lost all its leavening power since
the yeast is dead. What it hasn't lost is its ability
to deliver wonderful flavor. Our Second Chance
versions yield a great-tasting sourdough crust by
adding the inactive liquid levain along with instant
dry yeast (from 0.43% to 0.81, depending on the
pizza type) to compensate for the leavening power
the levain no longer has.
COMPLEAT WHEAT
Compleat wheat delivers great whole wheat flavor
without the dense crumb. We re-create whole wheat
flour using bread flour as the foundation and then
adding hydrated toasted wheat germ and bran as
inclusions to the dough.We mix them in when
the dough achieves medium gluten development
because they would be very difficult to incorporate
when the dough is at full gluten development (and
adding them at the beginning of the mix would compromise the strength and structure of the dough).
The dough is bulk fermented, anda series of folds
is performed so that the dough reaches full gluten
development without the stress of the mixer.
GRAIN, NUT, AND SEED INCLUSIONS
If you're adding grains to the dough, you can soak
them, sprout them, or cook them into a porridge or
puree before mixing them in. Seeds can be left whole
(though some benefit from soaking), but most nuts
should be chopped, otherwise they can damage the
dough when they are mixed in or during shaping.
The flavor of seeds and nuts can be enhanced
by toasting, which is why we highly recommend
it. As is the case with the Compleat Wheat and
Ancient Grain variations, the inclusions are added
after you've mixed the dough to medium gluten
development; the dough is then bulk fermented,
and folds are performed until it achieves full gluten
development.
COUNTRY STYLE
This variation aims to get the taste of rye and whole
wheat into the crust of each category of pizza, and
we've varied the type and quantity of rye flour (light,
medium, or dark) for a range of flavor. The recipes
call for T85 flour, which contains a bit less wheat
bran and germ than regular whole wheat flour,
producing a more open-crumbed pizza that is light
in texture but still has the flavor of whole wheat. If
you can't find T85 flour, regular whole wheat flour
is fine.
Bran and germ typically cause a decrease in
volume in both pizza and bread. The compleat
wheat technique that we developed (see page
42) allows you to include both components
and still get a light, airy rim crust.
You can put virtually any combination of
grains, nuts, or seeds into your pizza dough
(see page 1:331). We don't recommend using
this type of inclusion for a thin-crust dough,
however, because the size of the inclusions
willcause the dough to rip during shaping.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 101
7
ANCIENT GRAIN
We use a 60%/40% blend of bread flour and
ancient grain flour (spelt, Khorasan, emmer,
einkorn, and/or buckwheat in different combinations) so the flavor of the grains comes through
without sacrificing the volume of the crumb. The
thin-crust version needed a bit of help to maintain
its structure, so we use a high-gluten bread flour. To
amp up the grain flavor in all but the thin-crust, we
also add a soaked grain as an inclusion. You can use
essentially any blend of ancient grain flours, so long
as you don't exceed the recommended 40 amount.
NO-KNEAD
In these variations, time, not mixing, is what accomplishes the gluten development. The ingredients
get stirred together just until homogeneous, and
the dough is bulk fermented for 12-18 hours at
room temperature. Because of this long ferment, the
amount of yeast is cut back significantly to prevent
overproofing. Dividing and shaping redistributes
the gas produced during the fermentation process,
redistributes the food for the yeast, and evens out
the temperature of the dough. A final proofof
several hours allows the dough to regenerate the gas
bubbles as well as to develop flavor. This method is
not recommended for our pan-baked pizzas since
it doesn't get the dough as strong as we would like,
and we had to degas it too much in order to get the
dough to fill the pan.
YOUR DAILY PIZZA
Based on the technique found in The New Artisan
Bread in Five Minutes a Day, we developed recipes
and a method specifically for pizza dough. Our tests
ultimately produced a dough that will allow you to
make a Neapolitan, thin-crust, or deep-dish pizza
every day for 14 days, or an artisan or New York
pizza every day for 10 days. This dough is mixed
only to a homogeneous mass to avoid overdeveloping the gluten. It also contains considerably less
yeast than the master recipes, again to prevent
overproofing. Since you're starting with less yeast,
you jump-start its activity by letting the dough bulk
ferment for an hour before putting it in refrigeration.
You will have to wait at least 23 hours before making
that first pizza to be sure the dough is at full gluten
development. For each pizza, pull off just enough
dough for a crust, then shape it and proof for 3-4
hours before baking.
Because of the long refrigeration time, there
are several additions to the ingredients. The first is
ascorbic acid, which counteracts the discoloration
(oxidation) that would naturally occur without it.
The other is polydextrose (in some cases) and one
or a combination of the following: diastatic malt
powder, sugar, and/or malted barley syrup. These
provide the yeast with enough fuel to sustain it for
10-14 days.
This method does not work for bread-like pizzas
because the dough loses too much volume when
gathered from the tub and extended in the pan. The
yeast simply had too high of a mountain to climb
after that many days, and in our tests the crust never
developed good volume, color, or flavor.
FLAVOR VARIATIONS
In addition to all these variations, you will find
others for each type of pizza dough that swap a
puree for some or all of the water in the recipe. Feel
free to experiment with other purees or sauces of
similar hydration, or with similar ingredients, like
red onions instead of shallots or different types of
peppers instead of poblanos. Just take care to keep
the level of hydration the same to ensure proper baking results. We provide additional information on
making purees on page 1:339 and on mixing purees
into doughs on page 41.
GLUTEN-FREE PIZZA DOUGHS
Our gluten-free pizza doughs provide options for a
multitude of styles, including Neapolitan. We recommend using our Gluten-Free Flour Blend on page
199 for each of the recipes except the Gluten-Free
Pan Pizza Dough (see page 197), which has its own
blend. We also offer variations with the commercially available Caputo Fiore Glut gluten-free flour
blend for the majority of the master doughs.
The sky is the limit when it comes to flavoring
your doughs with purees. The ones shown
below include pesto, pumpkin, ube, spinach,
huitlacoche, tomato, and chipotles in adobo.
If you want to create a deeper hue in your
dough, you can add some food coloring to
make for a more dramatic pizza.
7
EXPERIMENT
GLUTEN-FREE PIZZA TESTING
For people diagnosed with celiac disease, keeping a strict gluten-free
diet is a lifelong necessity. Many professionals in the baking industry have
given their best effort to create successful versions of gluten-free breads
and pizza. Of all the foods to be adapted into gluten-free versions, bread
and pizza are by far the most difficult. After all, gluten is the critical component that allows the dough to trap gas effectively and gives the crumb
its texture.
In order to create a gluten-free pizza recipe, we swapped the simplicity of the classic four-ingredient pizza dough for a dough containing
various flours and added agents that would maintain an elastic structure
during baking. We based our gluten-free pizza doughs on the gluten-free
flour blend from Modernist Bread, which was formulated to have seven
required ingredients: white, brown, and glutinous rice flours; cornstarch;
tapioca starch; nonfat milk powder; and xanthan gum. The glutinous rice
flour plays a major role in our baking success. When hydrated in doughs
and baked, it retains a particular chewiness that is reminiscent of gluten. Xanthan gum, a thickener, is another important addition because it
absorbs water and makes the mixture more viscous. Nonfat milk powder
adds a bit of sweetness to gluten-free bread but, more importantly, the
lactose it contains helps the pizza brown better during baking via the
Maillard reaction (see page 393). Transglutaminase is optional in the
recipe. This ingredient is typically used as a "meat glue" to bind meat
proteins together. We found that it also binds the proteins in this flour
blend to create a bread with noticeable chew and a consistency similar
to wheat bread.
Although our gluten-free pizza doughs include a flour preparation
step, many of them are ultimately faster than their master counterparts
since all the gluten-free doughs are direct. The doughs are mixed to a
homogeneous mass, bulk fermented, and then proofed to develop the
flavor. Given the factthat the proofing is not done for gluten develoрment, no folds are required.
The hydration levels and the dough weights were adjusted on a caseby-case basis. For example, our Gluten-Free Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see
page 195) has a slightly lower hydration than the master (60) but also
includes 2extra-virgin olive oil. The dough weight was increased to
300 g, and the dough was cold-proofed for 24 hours. The resulting pizza,
although slightly denser than the traditional version, had good chewiness
and a slight crispiness in the crust. We were even able to achieve some
leoparding, the dark spots on the crust often regarded as an authentic
Neapolitan attribute. For some of the larger diameter pizzas, such as New
York gluten-free pizza, we also suggest baking in a 35 cm/14 in round
pan or on parchment paper because it helps maintain the structure of
the pizzas.
Among bread-like pizzas, the Detroit-style gluten-free pizza was very
flavorful and could probably fool someone into thinking that it wasn't
gluten-free. It is surrounded by crispy cheese, which can't hurt, but it
also has good crumb texture and a nice crunchiness from the bottom
crust. After quite a number of failures trying to formulate a solid recipe
for gluten-free focaccia, high-hydration al taglio, and New York square
pizzas, we were inspired by a recipe containing psyllium husk in Meyers
Glutenfri Bageskole by Meyers Madhus. We finally accomplished crispy
pizza with the right amount of chew, and the flavor was heightened in
the focaccia with the addition of rosemary and Parmesan.
We also explored several brands of commercial gluten-free mixes and
tested gluten-free recipes from books. Common issues that we found
were no rise in the rim and an off-flavor or chewiness. The Caputo Fiore
Glut gluten-free flour blend yielded the best results of the brands we
tried. In summary, all of the master pizza doughs can be made glutenfree based on the recipes in this book. But if we were to select the most
adaptable to gluten-free, we'd advise you to go with thin-crust, Brazilian
thin-crust, deep-dish, and Detroit-style.
Our Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough on page 198 (see bottom photo) produces a pizza
that is slightly denser than our master Detroit-Style Pizza Dough on page 166 (see top photo).
The gluten-free pizza has substantial volume, however, and a crunchy bottom crust that
delivers a satisfying result.
104 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
WHEN YOU'RE IN A HURRY
It can happen to anyone. You forgot an ingredient
in the dough or didn't weigh the dough ingredients
accurately. You have run out of dough during a busy
service. Your fridge broke down and your dough
overproofed beyond rescue (see Dough CPR on page
77). You have guests coming tonight, but you misread
the recipe and realize now that it needs to be made
48 hours ahead. You have a last-minute catering event
and they want pizza. What can you do?
Our emergency doughs take 2-3 hours to
make from start to finish. We have also listed a few
shortcuts that you can take to have a dough ready to
bake in a few hours (these shortcuts can all be used
in combination at once). The caveat is that for any
shortcut you take, there is a price to pay. You won't
have as developed a flavor, and the color of the pizza
might not be as deep once it is baked. The aroma of
the pizza is also typically diminished. Doughs made
in a hurry are not an exact substitute for the master
recipes, but you will at least have an acceptable
and passable version of the different styles ofpizza, which is better than nothing at all.
Here are a few shortcuts you can take:
Add 0.8-1% instant dry yeast to your recipe and
you will have a dough that is ready in 2-3 hours.
Mix the dough with water that is between 27 and
32°C/80 and 90° F. The warmer water will help
the yeast start fermenting faster. You can do this in
combination with adding extra instant dry yeast.
In some instances, as in high-hydration doughs,
we recommend mixing the dough to medium
gluten development because it helps maintain an
open crumb while the pizzas bake. But if you are in
a hurry,you can mix these doughs to full gluten
development on high speed and reduce bulk fermentation time to 30 minutes to relax the dough
for a little bit before you divide it and shape it.
Proof the dough in a warm area (well covered or
with humidity control).
Use a dough relaxer (see page 1:327). Doughs that
have such little time to relax after being mixed,
divided, and proofed will be difficult to stretch
properly.
CPLIT/RESET
SUN MON TUL
MODE
TUE WED THU
MIN
START/STOР
FRI SAT ส
4:5372 SEC 1/100S WATER - RESISTANT
7
COMMON DOUGH PROBLEMS
We discuss several tips and tricks to avoid these pitfalls in the Making Pizza Dough chapter beginning on
page 3, but below is a snapshot of the most common dough problems and ways to troubleshoot them.
THE DOUGH IS OVERPROOFED
Proper proof Overproofed Dough CPR
performed
THE DOUGH IS TOO STICKY
SOLUTION
You can salvage the dough using the CPR method on
page 77. The basic steps ofthe method are to degas
and reshape the dough (see photos below).
SOLUTION
Chill the dough during bulk fermentation. Cold
doughs are firmer and easier to handle. It will slow
down fermentation, so be sure to make up for this
time after shaping the dough.
Oil your work surface. This is not desirable for some
doughs, like Neapolitan, since they aren't supposed
to be coated in oil, but it is perfectly fine for highhydration al taglio, focaccia, New York square, and
Detroit-style doughs.
Use a large plaster knife to move the dough around
and to form round dough balls without using your
hands (see photos at right and on page 63).
THE DOUGH HAS DRIED ON THE SURFACE SOLUTION
This happens mostly with dough that has already
been shaped, especially dough shaped into a ball.
You will be able to tell because it will feel rough and
dry on the surface instead of tacky and wet. Before
you trim that dry part off, try misting the dried surface with water, covering it with plastic wrap, and
waiting a few minutes for the water to become
absorbed by the dough (see photos at right); alternatively, cover the dough with a slightly damp
paper or cloth towel. This doesn't typically happen
with doughs that are pan baked since they are often
coated in oil.
THE DOUGH HAS BLACK SPECKS SOLUTION
This usually happens with doughs that are coldproofed for long periods of time, and it means the
dough is oxidizing. It doesn't mean there is anything
wrong with the dough itself (see page 72). Shape it
and bake it as instructed in the recipe and those
black specks will disappear after the dough is t
БАЗА МИУМ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
106 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THE DOUGH IS HARD TO STRETCH SOLUTION
The dough might be very low in hydration. If this is
the case, using a rolling pin or sheeter to shape the
dough is easier than trying to do it by hand.
The dough may be very strong and just needs time
to relax. We experience this with most of the doughs
that are extended into a pan, such as high-hydration
al taglio, focaccia, and Detroit-style doughs. Your
best course of action is to try to extend the dough as
much as possible without tearing it, and then let it
rest for 20-30 minutes, well covered or in a proofer.
Then try again. It might be possible that you will
need to do this more than once depending on how
tense or firm the dough is. You can also use one of
the dough relaxers we recommend in the Modernist
versions of the majority of the styles of pizza.
THE DOUGH IS NOT REACHING FULL
GLUTEN DEVELOPMENT IN THE MIXER
SOLUTION
The dough is high in hydration. If this is the case, mix
on the highest speed. It will eventually get to full
gluten development. Alternatively, take the dough off
the mixer and develop it via bulk fermentation, performing a series of folds until the dough reaches the
desired gluten development.
There isn't enough dough in the mixer for the hook to
"catch" the dough. Increase the yield of the recipe
until there is enough dough in the mixer. We have
dough quantity recommendations for each bowl size
in the machine mixing options sections of each master recipe.Alternatively, start mixing with a paddle
attachment and switch to a hook attachment once
the dough has become cohesive to finish mixing it.
THE DOUGH IS TEARING (NOT STRETCHING) SOLUTION
Your dough may not have reached the desired gluten
development yet. Mix it for longer until it does
stretch. If it is already off the mixer and bulk fermenting, continue to perform folds until it develops to the
point of stretching and not tearing.
The dough is very dry (low in hydration). Mix at a
lower speed or by hand. In extreme cases (say, the
amount of water was incorrectly scaled), add more
water to the dough while mixing on low speed until it
is absorbed and the dough no longer tears.
If the dough is tearing in the pan, it's because you are
pulling too hard and the dough isn't cooperating. If
you have made a tear in the dough, simply tuck it
under itself as shown. Let the dough relax for at least
15-20 minutes before you try to stretch it again.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 107
7
WHAT DOUGH TO PICK?
It can be difficult to tell what dough will suit you best or which type of
dough best matches your skill level. If you aren't sure where to begin,
here is a cheat sheet you can use to get an idea of what recipe to choose.
I'M NEW TO DOUGH
Who this is for: you've never made any kind of dough
or have practiced acertain style very little.
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 110)
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 114)
• Direct New York Pizza Dough (see page 136)
Apizza Dough (see page 138)
Quad Cities Pizza Dough (see page 140)
No-Knead Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 182) and
Your Daily Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 184)
No-Knead Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 182) and
Your Daily Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 184)
No-knead thin-crust pizza dough
High-hydration al taglio pizza dough
I'VE GOT BREAD EXPERIENCE
Who this is for: you are a baker or a home baker who has
made bread at home frequently, so you are familiar with the
process of making dough and its stages. Mixing, shaping, and
proofing dough are not daunting to you, but you've never
really made pizza or maybe not more than one style of pizza.
Focaccia Dough (see page 148)
New York Square Pizza Dough (see page 152)
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158)
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough (see page 166)
Argentinean-Style "al Molde" Pizza Dough (see page 170)
Old Forge Pizza Dough (see page 171)
I'M IN A HURRY
Who this is for: well, clearly those who are in a hurry.
These are pizzas that will take, at the most, 3½ hours
to complete from start to finish, and some as little at 2
hours. Some are relatively quick to make without having
to resort to any shortcuts, but we also have emergency
versions of some of the master recipes in this book.
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough (see page 114)
Emergency Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page 131)
Emergency New York Pizza Dough (see page 137)
Emergency Artisan Pizza Dough (see page 147)
Emergency High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 163)
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough (see page 166)
108 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Detroit-style pizza dough
I'M MODERNIST
Who this is for: you embrace the modernist philosophy
of cooking and want to make a better pizza by
trying a different ingredient or technique.
Any Modernist Pizza Dough recipe (see pages 112, 116, 121, 135,
145, 151, 155, 161, and 169)
Modernist High-Hydration Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page
127), New York Pizza Dough (see page 132), and Artisan Pizza
Dough (see page 142) to achieve a crust with a high volume
Any Compleat Wheat Pizza Dough recipe (see pages 174-177)
Compleat wheat artisan dough
Deep-dish pizza dough
I'M COOKING FOR A CROWD
Who this is for: you are a small pizzeria owner or a home
baker who is having a large gathering. Not all pizzas work
well forfeeding large groups of people. Neapolitan pizza
is a terrible idea for entertaining. You'll be anchored
to your oven for the duration of the evening.
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough (see page 118)
New York Square Pizza Dough (see page 152)
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158)
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough (see page 166)
I HAVE TIME
Who this is for: you planned and allotted time
to get your preferments ready and for the
doughs to proof or even cold-proof.
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough (see page 118)
New York Pizza Dough (see page 132)
Artisan Pizza Dough (see page 142)
Focaccia Dough (see page 148)
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough (see page 158)
New York pizza dough
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 109
7
MASTER RECIPE
THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHАРЕ
☑
Active 15 min/
Inactive 3% h
three 50 cm/ 20 in pizzas
or four 40 cm /16 in pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 55 g 13 cup +1 Tbsp 100
Water 55 g 1/4 cup 100 NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Ingredients Weight
For the Dough Flour 595 g 100
Water, 21°C/70°F 370 g 12/3 cups 68.52 Water 425 g 71.43
Instant dry yeast 4.8 g 13½ tsp 0.89 Cornmeal 65 g 10.92
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 540 g 4 cups 100 Salt 13 g 2.18
Fine-ground cornmeal 65 g 2/3 cup 12.04 Yeast 4.86 g
0.82
Fine salt 13 g 214 tsp +8 tsp 2.41
Yield: ~1.1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page I:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call theirflour all-purpose,but the protein content places it in the bread flour category.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing
it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21° C/70°F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and
cornmeal, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; mix
on medium speed to low gluten development; add the
salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough
hook to catch all the ingredients and mix a uniform dough in
an 8 qt bowl.
You can add up to 10 liquid or solid fat to this dough. Add
along with the salt. For more on the experiment results that
yielded this recommendation, see page 1:318.
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
50 cm/20 in: 370 g
40 cm/16 in: 275 g
ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
2-3 h at 21°C/ 70° F, covered; optional cold-proof for 1
d at 4°C/39°F; for shaping instructions, see page 3:12;
for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:19
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our thin-crust pizza doughs. If the
ingredient quantities aren't large enough for the dough hook to mix them well in
a stand mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to
mix the ingredients uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass (the dough is
sticky and wet, and there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water), switch
to a hook attachment.
You could try using a combination of 100 rye flour and 11 vital wheat gluten to
create a 100 rye version ofthis dough. Be sure to mix according to the instructions in the 100 Rye Neapolitan Pizza Dough on page 129 and to use rye flour in
the poolish as well.
If making this pizza in a home oven, the 40 cm/16 in size is the maximum
that will fit. We recommend either making this size or a 33 cm/13 in pizza
(200 g dough). This will be closer to a tavern-style pizza (see page 1:105).
110 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 3 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 3 min. Add the salt, and mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, about 8 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add the
salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, about 20 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
If you are using the diving arm mixer, the dough will
be slightly softer than the doughs made with the
other mixers, but it is easy to roll and shape.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 2 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 3 min. Add the salt, and mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, about 5 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 4 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 5 min. Add the salt, and mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, about 10
min. Perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development.
Add salt at low gluten development
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 4 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 4 min. Add the salt, and mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, about 8 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
will vary
Mix: place the flour, cornmeal, salt, and yeast
in the bowl. Pour the poolish on top of the dry
ingredients. Turn the machine on and pour in
the water. Mix for 45 s. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development. If the
gluten is not fully developed, mix for a few
more seconds and check again.
Full gluten development
PREP
1
MIX
Combine the flour, water, and yeast for the
poolish, and mix to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer the poolish to an airtight container,
cover, and let it ripen at 21°C/70° F for
12-16 h before mixing it into the dough (see
page 1:300).
2 Followthe Machine Mixing Options above.
3 Transfer the dough to a lightly floured
worktable. Cover well with a plastic bag or
tarp.
BENCH REST
4 Bench rest for 20 min.
DIVIDE
5 Divide into three 370 g pieces for 50 cm/
20 in pizzas or four 275 g pieces for 40 cm/
16 in pizzas (see page 55). The 50 cm/20 in
pizzas are for deck, electric deck, and
wood-fired pizza ovens; the 40 cm/16 in
pizzas are meant for home, combi, and
convection ovens because the larger pizzas
will not fit in them.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
5
111
7
PRESHAРЕ
6a 6b
6 Preshape each piece into a ball (see pages
60-62)
PROOF
9 Proof the dough, covered, for 2-3 h at
21°C/70°F. If you are rolling the dough
out right away rather than cold-proofing,
skip from here to the shaping instructions
on page 3:12. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page 3:19.
7
Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over each ball of
dough.
COLD PROOF (OPTIONAL)
10 Transfer the dough into refrigeration and
cold-proof for 1 d at 4° C/39°F.
11 Remove the dough from refrigeration
11/2-2 h before shaping so it warms up and
is easier to stretch out.
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll the dough out and make the pizza. We recommend coldproofing the dough for1 d, however, because it produces a crispier thin-crust pizza. If you cold-proof
the dough, remove it from refrigeration 1/½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and is easier to stretch out.
8 Cover the tub well or wrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
12 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:12. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:19.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
MODERNIST THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15 min/
Inactive 3% h
three 50 cm/20 in pizzas
or four 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 55 g 13 cup + 1 Tbsp 100
Water 55 g 14 cup 100 NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Ingredients Weight
For the Dough Flour 595 g 100
Water, 21°C/70°F 370 g 12/3 cups 68.52 Water 425 g 71.43
Dough relaxer options Cornmeal 55 g 9.24
see table below
Salt 13 g 2.18
Instant dry yeast 4.8 g 134 tsp 0.89
Polydextrose 6 g
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 540 g 4 cups 100
Yeast 4.86 g 0.82 Polydextrose 6g 11/½ tsp 1.1
Fine-ground cornmeal 55 g 1/½ cup 10.19
Fine salt 13 g 214 tsp + 8 tsp 2.41
Yield: ~1.1kg
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page I:xхіі.
*Werecommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour.Note that they
calltheir flour all-purpose, but the protein contentplaces it in the bread flourcategory. **You can approximate this smallamount ofyeast by measuring % tsp yeastand dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
on page 110. See the table at right for instructions on adding the dough
relaxer. Add the polydextrose with the flour.
If making this pizza in a home oven, the 40 cm/16 in size is the maximum that
will fit. We recommend either making this size or a 33 cm/ 13 in pizza (200 g
dough). This will be closer to a tavem-style pizza (see page 1:105).
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract pineapple juice, kiwi juice, and papaya juice, see page 1:328.
INGREDIENT 1% ADD TO
Pineapple juice, fresh 0.01 the water
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Kiwijuice, fresh 0.08 the water
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
Papaya juice, fresh 0.03 the water
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
112
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DIRECT THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Modernist thin-crust pizza dough
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 16 Active 15 min/
Water, 21°C/70°F 425 g 134 cups +11/½ Tbsp 71.43 Inactive 2 h
three 50 cm / 20 in pizzas
or four 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 4.8 g 13/4 tsp 0.81
Bread flour, 11.5%- 595 g 414 cups +2½ Tbsp 100 NET CONTENTS
12% protein* Ingredients Weight 1%
Fine-ground cornmeal 55 g 1/½ cup 9.24 Flour 595 g 100
Fine salt 13 g 24 tsp +1s tsp 2.18 Water 425 g 71.43
Yield: ~1.1 kg Cornmeal 55 g 9.24
Salt 13 g 2.18
Yeast 4.8 g 0.81
For salt, flours, andother notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call their flour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flour category.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough on page 111.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; mix on
medium speed to low gluten development; add the
salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
20 min: cover well
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
If making this pizza in a home oven, the 40 cm/16 in size is
the maximum that will fit. We recommend either making this
size or a 33 cm/13 in pizza (200 g dough). This will be closer
to a tavern-style pizza (see page 1:105).
50 cm/20 in: 370 g
40 cm/16 in: 275 g
ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
11½ h at 21° C/70° F, covered; optional cold-proof for 1
dat 4°C/39°F, covered; for shaping instructions, see
page 3:12; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:19
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll the dough out and
make the pizza. We recommend cold-proofing the dough for 1 d,
however, because it produces a crispier thin-crust pizza. If you coldproof the dough, remove it from refrigeration 1/½-2 h before shaping
so it warms up and is easier to stretch out.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 113
7
MASTER RECIPE
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 2 h
four 40 cm/16 in pizzas
or eight 23 cm/9 in pizzas
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 1%
Water, 21°C/70°F 310 g 11/3 cups 50.41
NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 3g 1% tsp 0.49 Ingredients Weight 26
Cake flour 370 g 3 cups 60.16 Cake flour 370 g
60.16
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 245 g 134 cups 39.84 Bread flour 245 g 39.84
Extra-virgin olive oil 60 g 1/4 cup + 1 tsp 9.76 Water 310 g 50.41
Fine salt 12.3 g 21/4 tsp 2
Fat 60 g 9.76
Yield: ~1 kg Salt 12.3 g 2
Yeast 3g 0.49 For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Central Milling OrganicArtisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough hook to catch all the
ingredients and mix a uniform dough in an 8 qt bowl.
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour it toward the center of the
dough rather than to the outside. This helps keep it from sloshing around the
bowl and makes it easier for the mixer to fully incorporate the oil into the dough.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the cake flour and
bread flour, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass;
mix on medium speed to low gluten development;
add the oil and salt, and mix on low speed until fully
incorporated; mix on medium speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly
floured worktable
DIVIDE
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll the dough
out and make the pizza. We recommend cold-proofing
the dough for 1 d, however, because it produces a crispier
thin-crust pizza. If you cold-proof the dough, remove it from
refrigeration 11/½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and is
easier to stretch out.
40 cm/16 in: 250 g
23 cm/9 in: 125 g
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
1/½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered; optional cold-proof for
1dat 4°C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions, see
page 3:12; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:25
BENCH REST 20 min; coverwell
114 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the cake flour and bread flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 1 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 3 min. Add the oil and salt, and mix on
low speed until it is fully incorporated, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, about 7 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the cake flour and bread flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 2 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 5 min. Add the oil and salt, and mix on
low speed until it is fully incorporated, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, about 3 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the cake flour and bread flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 2 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 5 min. Add the oil and salt, and mix on
low speed until it is fully incorporated, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, about 6 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
will vary
Mix: place the cake flour, bread flour, salt, and
yeast in the bowl. Turn the machine on and
pour in the water and oil. Mix for 45 s. Perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten development. If the gluten is not fully developed, mix
for a few more seconds and check again.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the cake flour and bread flour, and mix
on low speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add
the oil and salt, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development, about 15 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
If you are using the diving arm mixer, the dough will
be slightly softer than the doughs made with the
other mixers, but it is easy to roll and shape.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity ofthe mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the cake flour and bread flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass, about 3 min. Mix
on medium speed to low gluten development,
about 5 min. Add the oil and salt, and mix on
low speed until it is fully incorporated, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, about 20 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our thincrust pizza doughs. If the ingredient quantities aren't
large enough for the dough hook to mix them well
in a stand mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use
a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients
uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass
(the dough is sticky and wet, and there are no visible
clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook
attachment.
Add oil in slow stream Full gluten development
MIX DIVIDE
1 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
2 Transfer the dough to a lightly floured
worktable. Cover well with a plastic bag or
tarp.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
BENCH REST
3 Bench rest for 20 min. 4
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
00
Divide into four 250 g pieces for 40 cm/
16 in pizzas or eight 125 g pieces for 23 cm/
9 in pizzas (see page 55).
115
7
PRESHAРЕ PROOF
5
5 Preshape each piece into a ball (see page
60).
6 Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over each ball of
dough.
7 Cover the tub well or wrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
8 Proof the dough, covered, for 1½ h at
21°C/70°F. If you are rolling the dough
out right away rather than cold-proofing,
skip from here to the shaping instructions
on page 3:12. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page 3:25.
COLD-PROOF (OPTIONAL)
9 Transfer the dough into refrigeration and
cold-proof for 1 d at 4° C/39°F.
10 Remove the dough from refrigeration
1½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and
is easier to stretch out.
11 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:12. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:25.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 1%
Active 10-15 min / four 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Inactive 2 h or eight 23 cm/ 9 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 310 g 11/3 cups 50.41
Instant dry yeast 3g 178 tsp 0.49 NET CONTENTS
Cake flour 370 g 3 cups +1 Tbsp 60.16 Ingredients Weight
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 245 g 134 cups 39.84 Cake flour 370 g
60.16
Dough relaxer options
see table below
Bread flour 245 g 39.84
Water 310 g 50.41
Polydextrose 6g 11/½ tsp 0.98
Fat 60 g 9.76
Extra-virgin olive oil 60 g 14 cup + 1 tsp 9.76 Salt 12.3 g 2
Fine salt 12.3 g 214 tsp Polydextrose 6 g 0.98
Yeast 3g 0.49 Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхіі.
*We recommend using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough on page 114. See the table at right for instructions on adding the
dough relaxer. Add the polydextrose with the flour.
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract pineapple juice and kiwi juice, see page 1:328. Bromelain and
meat tenderizer performed best in our tests.
116
INGREDIENT ADD TO...
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
Pineapple juice, fresh 0.01 the water
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08 the water
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
30% FAT BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Water, 21°C/70°F 277 g 114 cups 50.36
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 3 h
four 40 cm/16 in pizzas
or eight 23 cm/9 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 2.7 g 1 tsp 0.49
High-gluten bread flour, 550 g 4 cups +1 Tbsp 100 NET CONTENTS
14% protein* Ingredients Weight 圖
Powdered lecithin 16.5 g 2 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 3
Flour 550 g 100
Ghee, softened 165 g 34 cup 30 Water 277 g 50.36
Fine salt 16.5 g 1 Tbsp 3
Fat 165 g 30
Yield: ~1 kg Powdered lecithin 16.5 g
3
Salt 16.5 g
3
Yeast 2.7 g
0.49
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхіі.
*We recommend using King Arthur Sir Lancelot High Gluten Flour.
If the lecithin is clumping, sift it before adding to the mixer's bowl.
This recipe can be made with 30 butter and up to 50 ghee. When baking, the
higher the fat, the shorter the baking time. The 50 fat dough bakes for 4 min.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough on page 114. Replace the cake flour and bread flour with highgluten flour. Add the lecithin with the flour and use the ghee in place
of the olive oil. Mix in half of the ghee once the dough has reached a
shaggy mass. Once incorporated, add the other half, and mix on medium
speed to full gluten development. Do not cold-proof the dough because
the ghee will harden and make the dough difficult to roll out.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
GRILLED BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 2 h
six 30-35 cm by 10-15 cm/
12-14 in by 4-6 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 310 g 113 cups 50.41
Instant dry yeast 3g 18tsp 0.49 NET CONTENTS
High-gluten bread flour,
14% protein*
615 g 4/2 cups 100 Ingredients Weight 2%
Flour 615 g 100
Extra-virgin olive oil
Fine salt
60 g 14 cup +1 tsp 9.76 Water 310 g 50.41
18.5 g 314 tsp 3
Fat 60 g
9.76
Yield: ~1 kg Salt 18.5 g
3
3g 0.49 For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using King Arthur Sir Lancelot High Gluten Flour.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough on page 114. Replace the cake flour and bread flour with highgluten flour. Mix in half of the oil once the dough has reached a shaggy
mass. Once incorporated, add the other half, and mix on medium speed
to medium gluten development. Divide the dough into 150 g pieces.
Shape according to the instructions on page 3:12. Assemble and bake the
pizza according to the instructions on page 3:25.
Yeast
For more on grilling pizza, see page 414.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 117
7
MASTER RECIPE
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 3 Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 2 h Water, 21° C/70°F 225 g 1 cup 59.21
one 32 cm by 5 cm deep/12½ in by 2 in
deep pizza or three 21 cm by 5 cm deep /
8½% in by 2 in deep pizzas
Instant dry yeast 3.1 g 18 tsp 0.82
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 380 g 23/4 cups 100
NET CONTENTS Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 1/3 cup 10.53
Ingredients Weight %
Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 3½ tsp 4.74
Flour 380 g 100
Butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74
Water 228 g 60
Fine salt 8 g 11/4 tsp +1% tsp 2.11
Cornmeal 40 g
10.53
Yield: ~700 g
Fat 33 g
8.68
Salt 8 g
2.11
Yeast 3.1g 0.82
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call their flour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flour category.
The 700 g yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough hook to catch all
the ingredients and mix a uniform dough in an 8 qt bowl.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
If you don't want to use lard, you can double the amount of
butter in the dough.
combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and cornmeal,
and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; add the lard
and butter, and mix on medium speed to low gluten
development; add the salt, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development; perform the windowpane
test to assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer
to a lightly floured worktable
DIVIDE
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
118 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
32 cm by 5 cm deep /121/2 in by 2 in deep:
do not divide
21 cm by 5 cm deep/81/½ in by 2 in deep: 230 g
ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
1/½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered; optional cold-proof for
1dat4°C/39°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:88; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:93
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, about 3 min. Add the
lard and butter, and mix on medium speed
to low gluten development, 5-7 min. Add the
salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated, about I min. Mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, 7-8 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, about 4 min. Add the
lard and butter, and mix on medium speed to
low gluten development, about 5 min. Add the
salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated, about 1 min. Mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, about 7 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our thincrust pizza doughs. Ifthe ingredient quantities aren't
large enough for the dough hook to mix them well
in a stand mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use
a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients
uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass
(the dough is sticky and wet, and there are no visible
clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook
attachment.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, about I min. Add the
lard and butter, and mix on medium speed to
low gluten development, about 3 min. Add the
salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated, about 1 min. Mix on medium
speed to full gluten development, 3-4 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, about 5 min. Add the
lard and butter, and mix on medium speed
to low gluten development, about 12 min.
Add the salt, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development, about 24 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the
mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast.
Add the flour and cornmeal, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add the lard,
butter, and salt, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development, about 21 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
If you are using the diving arm mixer, the dough will
be slightly softer than the doughs made with the
other mixers, but it is easy to roll and shape.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
will vary
Mix: place the flour, cornmeal, lard, butter,
salt, and yeast in the bowl. Turn the machine
on and pour in the water. Mix for 45 s. Perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten develoрment. If the gluten is not fully developed, mix
for a few more seconds, and check again.
MIX
1 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
2 Transfer the dough to a lightly floured
worktable. Cover well with a plastic bag or
tarp.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
Add solid fat at shaggy mass Full gluten development
BENCH REST DIVIDE
3 Bench rest for 20 min. 4 Do not divide for a 32 cm/12/½ in pizza.
Divide into three 230 g pieces for 21 cm/
81/½ in pizzas (see page 55).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 119
7
PRESHAРЕ PROOF
5
5
Preshape each piece into a ball (see pages
60-62).
6 Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over the dough.
7 Coverthe tub well or wrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
If you are baking only one of the 21 cm/8/½ in
pizzas, individually wrap the remaining dough with
plastic wrap after preshaping the dough and freeze
for up to 2 mo. The dough freezes better if you flatten the ball slightly into a disc.
8 Proof the dough, covered, for 1½ h at
21°C/70° F. If you are rolling the dough
out right away rather than cold-proofing,
skip from here to the shaping instructions
on page 3:88. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page 3:93.
COLD-PROOF (OPTIONAL)
9 Transfer the dough into refrigeration and
cold-proof for 1 d at 4°C/39°F.
10 Remove the dough from refrigeration
11/2-2 h before shaping so it warms up and
is easier to stretch out.
11 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:88. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:93.
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll
the dough out and make the pizza. We recommend
cold-proofing the dough for 1 d, however, because it
produces a crispier deep-dish pizza.
120 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME %
Water, 21°C/70°F 225 g 1 cup 59.21
TOTAL TIME
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 2 h
YIELD/SHAPE
Instant dry yeast 3.1 g 18 tsp 0.82
one 32 cm by 5 cm deep/ 12% in by 2 in
deep pizza or three 21 cm by 5 cm deep /
8% in by2 in deep pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 380 g 23/4 cups 100
Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 13 cup 10.53 NET CONTENTS
Freeze-dried cheddar cheese
powder
40 g 1/3 cup 10.53 Ingredients Weight %
Flour 380 g 100
Freeze-dried butter powder 40 g 1/½ cup 10.53 Water 228 g 60
Polydextrose 3.8 g 1 tsp 1 Cornmeal 40 g 10.53
Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74 Fat 32 g 8.42
Butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74 Salt 8 g 2.11
Fine salt 8 g 114 tsp +% tsp 2.11 Polydextrose 3.8 g
1
Yield: ~700 g Yeast 3.1 g 0.82
For salt,flours, and othernotes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call theirflour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flour category.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
on page 118. Add the freeze-dried cheese powder, freeze-dried butter
powder, and polydextrose with the flour.
The freeze-dried butter and cheese powders add flavor to the
dough but also aid in browning. For where to purchase these
ingredients, see Resources, page 3:377.
If you don't want to use lard, you can double the amount of
butter in the dough.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH WITH POOLISH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME
☑
Active 15-20 min /
Inactive 2h
YIELD/SHAPE
one 32 cm by 5 cm deep/12%½ in by 2 in
deep pizza or three 21 cm by 5 cm deep/
8% in by 2 in deep pizzas Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 60 g 1/½ cup 100
Water 60 g 14 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 NET CONTENTS
For the Dough Ingredients Weight 1%
Water, 21°C/70°F 165 g 3/4 cup 51.56 Flour 380 g 100
Instant dry yeast 3.1 g 118 tsp 0.97 Water 228 g
09
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 320 g 2/3 cups 100 Cornmeal 40 g 10.53
Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 13 cup 12.5 Fat 33 g 8.68
Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 5.63 Salt 8 g 2.11
Butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp 5.63 Yeast 3.16 g 0.83
Fine salt 8 g 11/½ tsp + a tsp 2.5
Yield: ~700 g
Forsalt, flours,and other notes, see page I:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call theirflour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flour category.
**You can approximate this small amount of yeast by measuring a tsp yeast and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h before using; ferment at 21° C/70°F, covered. Follow the Mix through Proof instructions
for Deep-Dish Pizza Dough on page 118. Add the poolish to the water
along with the yeast.
If you don't want to use lard, you can double the amount of
butter in the dough.
Using a poolish reduces mixing time and, in most doughs,
makes it easier to roll it out. Some feel that it produces a better
flavor in the crust, but that can get lost once you top it with
sauce and cheese.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 121
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
CHEMICALLY LEAVENED DEEP-DISH
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 2 h
Water, 21°C/70°F 225 g 1 cup 59.21
one 32 cm by 5 cm deep /12% in by 2 in
deep pizza or three 21 cm by 5 cm deep/
8% in by 2 in deep pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 380 g 234 cups 100
Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 13 cup 10.53 NET CONTENTS
Baking soda 1.6 g 1/4 tsp 0.42 Ingredients Weight 196
Flour Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74 380 g 100
Water Butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74 228 g 60
Fine salt 8 g 1/½ tsp + 1½ tsp 2.11 Cornmeal 40 g 10.53
Fat Yield: ~700 g
33 g 8.68
Salt 8 g 2.11
Baking soda 1.6 g 0.42
Forsalt, flours, and othernotes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call theirflour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flour category
Pour the water in the mixer's bowl. Add the flour, cornmeal, and baking
soda, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass. Add the lard and butter,
and mix on medium speed to low gluten development. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed to full gluten development. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development (see page 30). Transfer to a lightly
floured worktable. Follow the Bench Rest through Proof instructions for
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough on page 118.
This recipe provides a finished crust that is closer to pâte
brisée. Chemically leavened doughs typically have to be
baked right away, but you can still bench rest this dough
because the gluten in the dough has developed.
If you don'twant to use lard, you can double the amount of
butter in the dough.
122 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPЕ
ENRICHED DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
☑
ADAPTED FROM PIZZERIA UNO
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ
Active 10-15 min /
Inactive 1% h
Water, 21°C/70°F 342 g 1/2 cups 58.76
one 32 cm by 5 cm deep /12% in by 2 in
deep pizza or three 21 cm by 5 cm deep/
8% in by 2 in deep pizzas
Instant dry yeast 7.5 g 234 tsp 1.29
Sugar 6g 11/½ tsp 1.03 NET CONTENTS
All-purpose flour, 10%- 582 g 41/3 cups 100 Ingredients Weight 8
11.5% protein Flour 582 g 100
Fine salt 3.9 g
Vegetable oil 222 g
3/4 tsp
1 cup
0.67 Water 342 g
58.76
38.14 Fat 222 g
38.14
Yield: ~1.1 kg Yeast 7.5 g 1.29
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii. Sugar 6g 1.03
Salt 3.9 g 0.67
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Deep-Dish Pizza
Dough on page 119.
For more on how Pizzeria Uno was the originator of this style, see page 1:245.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
combine the water, yeast, and sugar in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour,
and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; add the salt,
and mix on low speed until fully incorporated; add
the oil in a slow stream with the mixer running on low
speed, and mix until it is fully incorporated; mix on
medium speed to full gluten development; perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten development
(see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured worktable
DIVIDE 32 cm/12½ in: do not divide
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
21 cm/8/2 in: 230 g
ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
45 min at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions, see page 3:88; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:93
20 min; cover well
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 123
7
MASTER RECIPE
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 26 Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 27 h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 380 g 12/3 cups 62.3
Instant dry yeast 0.24 g a tsp 0.04
Bread flour, 11.5%-12.5% 610 g 41/½ cups 100 NET CONTENTS
protein, or 00 flour* Ingredients Weight 2%
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.06 g 0.01 Flour 610 g 100
(optional) Water 380 g 62.3
Fine salt 12.15 g 21/8 tsp 1.99
12.15 g
1.99
Yield: ~1 kg 0.24 g 0.04
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхіі.
*We recommend using Le 5 Stagioni Pizza Napoletana 00 Flour, Caputo Pizzeria 00
Flour, or Polselli Classica 00 Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount of dough relaxer by measuring ½ tsp meat tenderizer and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the dough.
The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough hook to catch all the
ingredients and mix a uniform dough in an 8 qt stand mixer bowl.
The meat tenderizer acts as a dough relaxer. It is optional, but we highly recommend it because it makes the dough easier to shape. Additionally, if you
overproof the dough, you can reball it, proof it, and bake it. Without the dough
relaxer, it would be hard to handle.
Salt
Yeast
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our medium-crust
pizza doughs. If the ingredient quantities aren't large
enough for the dough hook to mix them well in a stand
mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients uniformly. Once you
have a homogeneous mass (the dough is sticky and wet, and
there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water), switch
to a hook attachment.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and meat
tenderizer, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass;
add the salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a tub
lightly misted with water
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
250 g
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
3 h at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:47
BULK
FERMENT
20-24 h at 21°C/70° F; cover well
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast. Add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, 1-2 min. Add the salt,
and mix on medium speed to full gluten development, 13-15 min. Perform the windowpane
test to assess gluten development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast. Add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add the salt,
and mix on medium speed to full gluten development, about 15 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast. Add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, 1-2 min. Add the salt,
and mix on low speed until fully incorporated,
1-2 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, 4-5 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast. Add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low
speed to shaggy mass, 1-2 min. Add the salt,
and mix on medium speed to full gluten development, 8-10 min. Perform the windowpane
test to assess gluten development.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast. Add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass, 1-2 min. Add the salt,
and mix on low speed until fully incorporated,
1-2 min. Mix on medium speed to full gluten
development, 6-8 min. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
willvary Mix: place the flour, salt, yeast, and meat
tenderizer in the bowl. Turn the machine on
and pour in the water. Mix for 45 s. Perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten develoрment. If the gluten is not fully developed, mix
for a few more seconds and check again.
MIX
Low gluten development Full gluten development
BULK FERMENT
1 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above. 3 Bulk ferment, covered, for 20-24 h at
21°C/70° F. 2 Transfer the dough to a tub lightly misted
with water. Cover well with plastic wrap.
Full gluten development should coincide with a final
dough temperature of 27° C/80° F. For more on
desired dough temperature, see page 32.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
DIVIDE
00
4 Divide into four 250 g pieces (see page 55).
125
7
PRESHAPE
5a
5 Preshape each piece into a ball (see page
60).
PROOF
8 Proof the dough, covered, for 3 h at 21°C/
70° F.
126
5b
9 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:36. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page 3:47.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
6
6 Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over each ball of
dough.
7 Cover the tub well or wrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST HIGH-HYDRATION NEAPOLITAN
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 27% h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
For the Pregelatinized Flour
Water, 21°C/70°F 120 g
00 flour* 30 g
1/½ cup
1/4 cup
400 NET CONTENTS
100 Ingredients Weight
For the Dough Flour 610 g
100
Water, 21°C/70°F 380 g 12/3 cups 65.5 Water 500 g 81.97
Instant dry yeast 0.24 g 8 tsp 0.04 Salt 13 g 2.13
00 flour* 580 g 413 cups 100 Yeast 0.24 g 0.04
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.15 g
** 0.03
(optional)
Fine salt 13 g 214 tsp 2.24
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Le 5 Stagioni Pizza Napoletana 00 Flour, Caputo Pizzeria 00
Flour, or Polselli Classica 00 Flour.
**You can approximate this smallamount of dough relaxer by measuring /s tsp meat
tenderizer and dividing it into six equal parts. Use two parts to make the dough.
You are trying to achieve a desired dough temperature of 27-28°C/80-82° F.
We tried increasing the hydration of our master Neapolitan pizza dough but the
resultwas akin to modeling clay (see page 1:289). When we pregelatinized a portion of the lour, however, we were able to achieve a dough that was easy to mix
and shape despite its high hydration.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Neapolitan Pizza
Dough on page 125.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
whisk together the water and flour for the pregelatinized flour in a small sauce pot; cook over medium
heat while whisking constantly until the mixture
reaches 65°C/175° F; cool over an ice bath to room
temperature.
combine the water, yeast, and pregelatinized flour in
the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add
the flour and meat tenderizer, and mix on low speed to
a shaggy mass; add the salt, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development; perform the windowpane
test to assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a tub lightly misted with water
BULK
FERMENT
20-24 h at 21°C/70° F; cover well
DIVIDE
PRESHAРE
PROOF
250 g
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
3hat 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:47
Cook the water and flour Cool over an ice bath Full gluten development
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 127
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH WITH POOLISH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 8
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
(☑
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48% h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein, 60 g /2 cup 100
or 00 flour*
NET CONTENTS Water 60 g 14 cup 100 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Flour 595 g
100
For the Dough Water 390 g 65.55
Water, 21°C/70°F 330 g 17/½ cups 61.68 Salt 13.4 g
2.25
Instant dry yeast 2.3 g 34 tsp + /8 tsp 0.43 Yeast 2.36 g 0.4
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein,
or 00 flour*
535 g 4 cups 100
Fine salt 13.4 g 214 tsp + 18 tsp 2.5
Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Le 5 Stagioni Pizza Napoletana 00 Flour, Caputo Pizzeria 00
Flour, or Polselli Classica 00 Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount of yeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing itinto six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70°F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour,
and mix on low speed to low gluten development;
add the salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly
floured worktable
BENCH REST
DIVIDE
PRESHАPE
PROOF
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options
for Neapolitan Pizza Dough on page 125.
20 min; cover well
250 g
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
1-2 d at 4° C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:47
128 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
100% RYE NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 2%½ h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
Light rye flour* 60 g 1/2 cup 100
Water 60 g 14 cup 100 NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Ingredients Weight 96
For the Dough Flour 595 g 89.74
Water, 21°C/70°F 330 g 11/½ cups 54.73 Vital wheat gluten 68 g
10.36
Instant dry yeast 2.3 g 3/4 tsp + % tsp 0.38 Water 390 g
58.82
Light rye flour* 535 g 514 cups 88.72 Salt 13.4 g 2.02
Vital wheat gluten 68 g 1/½ cup 11.28 Yeast 2.36 g 0.37
Fine salt 13.4 g 214 tsp + 18 tsp 2.22
Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Bob's Red Mill Light Rye Flour or Bay State Milling Pure White
Rye Flour.
**You can approximate this smallamount ofyeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
This dough does not do well with a long cold fermentation
because the rye flour will cause it to overproof and be difficult
to handle. You also won't be able to reball and reuse this
dough after the proofing time is up.
To offset the fact that rye flourcontains significantly less
gluten-forming proteins, we added vital wheat gluten. It's a
dense crust, but it works because we roll it out very thin, and
it's full of rye flavor.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70° F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and
vital wheat gluten, and mix on low speed, using a paddle attachment, to a shaggy mass (see page 30); add the
salt, and mix on medium speed until the dough forms a
ball; transfer to a lightly floured worktable
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
DIVIDE 250 g
PRESHAPЕ
PROOF
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
11/2-2 h at 21°C/70° F, covered; for shaping instructions, see page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:47
129
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
AVPN NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
ADAPTED FROM THE ASSOCIAZIONE VERACE PIZZA NAPOLETANA
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Active 15-20 min /
Inactive 26 h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 400 g 134 cups 64.52
Fresh yeast 0.7g 1/s tsp 0.11 NET CONTENTS
Fine salt 17 g 1 Tbsp 2.74 Ingredients Weight 96
00 flour, 12%-13% protein* 620 g 41/2 cups 100 620 g
100
Yield: ~1 kg 400 g 64.52
17 g 2.74
0.7 g 0.11
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using 00flour but the AVPN recently added Tipo 0, 1, and 2 to the list of
acceptableflours (see page 1:278). Theflour should also have a W between 280 and 310.
For more on W numbers, see page 1:278.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX (BY HAND)
MIX (BY
MACHINE)
combine 50 g (3 Tbsp +1/½ tsp) of the water with
the yeast in a glass or jar, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast; combine the salt with the remainingwater in
a madia (wooden mixing box), and whisk to combine; add 60 g (/½ cup) of the flour, and stir into the
salt mixture, 1-2 min (it won't mix in completely);
add the yeast mixture and then the remaining flour,
and mix gently to a homogeneous mass; transfer to
a wooden or marble surface, and mix to full gluten
development, 5-7 min (see page 30); perform the
windowpane test to assess gluten development (see
page 30); transfer it back to the madia or a tub lightly
misted with water
combine 50 g (3 Tbsp +11½ tsp) of the water with the
yeast in a glass or jar, and whisk to dissolve the yeast;
combine the salt with the remaining water in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to combine; add 60 g (1/½ cup) of
the flour to the salt mixture, and mix on low speed,
1-2 min (it won't mix in completely); mix in the yeast
mixture on low speed; gradually add the remaining
flour in 4-5 additions, and mix on low speed to full
gluten development, about 15 min; perform the
windowpane test to assess gluten development (see
page 30); transfer to a tub lightly misted with water
Flour
Water
Salt
Yeast
For more on the AVPN rules for making Neapolitan pizza,
see page 3:43.
BULK FERMENT 12-18 h at 20-20.5°C/68-69°F; cover well
DIVIDЕ
PRESHAPE
PROOF
250 g
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
6-8 h at 20-20.5°C/68-69°F, covered; for shaping
instructions, see page 3:36; for assembly and baking
instructions, see page 3:47
In Naples, for a pizzeria to be certified as making true Neapolitan pizza, it must
follow the rules of the Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana (AVPN; see page
3:43). This recipe is consistent with the AVPN requirements regarding ingredients
and method, which includes a long bulk fermentation and proofing at room
temperature.
This dough is typically mixed in a fork mixer. Most fork mixers can mix only large
amounts of dough (the smallest we know of mixes 12 kg batches at a time); keeр
this in mind when determining the quantity of dough you want to make versus
the size and type of mixer that you have.
Alternatively, you can divide and preshape the balls of dough 1 h into bulk
fermentation, and leave them to ferment in a tub overnight. We found that this
method did not produce as good a pizza as the double fermentation method
(bulk fermenting overnight first, then fermenting after balling), but it does streamline production.
130 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MIX BY HAND
Add the yeast mixture and remaining flour,
and mix to a homogeneous mass
MIX BY MACHINE
Mix in the yeast mixture on low speed
Transfer to a wood or marble surface and
mix by hand to full gluten development
Perform the windowpane test
Ifyou don't have a madia, you can hand mix the
dough in a tub or a bowl.
Mix on low speed to full gluten
development
Perform the windowpane test
INGREDIENT VARIATION
EMERGENCY NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Bread flour, 11.5%-12.5% protein, 585 g 41/3 cups 100
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 2% h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
or 00 flour*
Water, 38°C/100°F 400 g 13/4 cups 68.38
NET CONTENTS
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 3.42 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 5.85 g
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:ххіi.
*We recommend using Le 5 Stagioni Pizza Napoletana 00 Flour, Caputo Pizzeria 00
Flour, or Polselli Classica 00 Flour.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Neapolitan Pizza Dough on page 125.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
Flour
Water
Salt
Yeast
2/8 tsp 1 585 g
100
400 g 68.38
20 g 3.42
5.85 g
1
MIX combine the flour, water, salt, and yeast in the mixer's
bowl; mix on medium-high speed to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
DIVIDE 250 g
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
The higher water temperature will help the dough proof faster, making it ready to
shape sooner.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
2 hat 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:47
131
7
MASTER RECIPE
NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48%h
one 50 cm/20 in pizza
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 60 g 1/½ cup 100
15% protein* NET CONTENTS
Water 60 g 14 cup 100 Ingredients Weight %
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Flour 590 g 100
For the Dough Water 410 g 69.49
Water, 21°C/70°F 350 g 1/2 cups 66.03 Fat 20 g 3.39
Instant dry yeast 2.8 g 1 tsp 0.53 Salt 14.5 g 2.46
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
530 g 32/3 cups 100 Diastatic malt powder 15 g
2.54
Yeast 2.86 g 0.48
Diastatic malt powder (optional) 15 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 2.83
Fine salt 14.5 g 2/½ tsp 2.74
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.77
Yield: ~1 kg
The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for
the dough hook to catch all the ingredients and mix
a uniform dough in an 8 qt stand mixer bowl.
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii
*We recommend using Tony Gemignani California Artisan Type 00 Flour Blend.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring tsp yeast and dividing it into sixequal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
BENCH REST
PRESHAPE
PROOF
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70°F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and
malt powder, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass;
mix on medium speed to low gluten development;
add the salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil with the machine running
on medium speed, and mix to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
20 min; cover well
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
1-2 d at 4°C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:71
Yield/Size Table
Multiply each ingredient in the New York Pizza Dough
master recipe by the number below to obtain the amount
of dough for different pizza sizes. For ingredients in small
amounts (such as salt, yeast, or diastatic malt powder),
precision is key. You should round to the nearest hundredth
of a gram.
PIZZA DIAMETER DOUGH WEIGHT MULTIPLIER
35 cm/14 in 400 g
0.4
40 cm/16 in 600 g 0.6
45 cm/18 in 800 g
0.8
55 cm/22 in 1.1 kg 1.1
60 cm/24 in 1.2 kg 1.2
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour it toward the
center of the dough rather than to the outside. This helps keep it
from sloshing around the bowl and makes it easier for the mixer to
fully incorporate the oil into the dough.
If making this pizza in a home oven, the 40 cm/16 in size is the
maximum that will fit. We recommend either making this size or the
35 cm/14 in pizza (400 g dough).
132 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
2 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 5 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 1 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 6 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 5 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 1 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 8 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
2 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 5 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 1 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 8 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
4 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 6 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 2 min. Add the oilwhile the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 15 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and mix
on low speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add
the salt and oil, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development, about 12 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
will vary
Mix: place the flour, malt powder, salt, and
yeast in the bowl. Pour the poolish on top of
the dry ingredients. Turn the machine on and
pour in the water. Mix for 45 s. Pour in the oil,
and mix for a few seconds, until it is completely
incorporated. Perform the windowpane test to
assess gluten development. If the gluten is not
fully developed, mix for a few more seconds
and check again.
Low gluten development
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our mediumcrust pizza doughs. If the ingredient quantities aren't
large enough for the dough hook to mix them well
in a stand mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use
a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients
uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass
(the dough is sticky and wet, and there are no visible
clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook
attachment.
Add salt at low gluten development
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mixing time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
Full gluten development
If you want to make a 400 g or 600 g pizza that will
fit in a home oven, we recommend mixing 1.2 kg
of dough and dividing it into 2 or 3 pieces because
these smaller yields are hard to mix in a stand mixer.
To make a single 400 g or 600 g dough ball, we
suggest that you hand mix the dough (see page 46).
133
7
PREP MIX BENCH REST
1
Combine the flour, water, and yeast for the
poolish, and mix to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer the poolish to an airtight container,
cover, and let it ripen at 21°C/70° F for
12-16 h before using (see page 1:300).
2 Follow the Machine Mixing Options on
page 133.
4 Bench rest for 20 min.
3
Transfer the dough to a lightly floured
worktable. Cover well with a plastic bag or
tarp.
PRESHAРЕ
5 Preshape the dough into a ball (see pages 61-62).
6 Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over the dough.
7
Cover the tub well or wrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
Although we recommend proofing the dough for
1-2 d, you can reball the dough after 2 d and return it
to refrigeration for up to another 3 d (5 d total).
If you're usinga tub to proof the dough, make sure
it is large enough to accommodate the expansion of
the dough ball.
COLD-PROOF
8 Cold-proof the dough, covered, for 1-2 d at
4°C/39°F.
9 Remove the dough from refrigeration 12-
2 h before shaping so it warms up and is
easier to stretch out.
10 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:66. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:71.
Cold-proofing will help the dough relax without
proofing it too far, making the dough easier to work
with. In our tests, letting the dough proof in refrigeration for at least 24 h produced a pizza dough that
was easier to stretch and had better volume and a
crispier crust.
134 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48%h
one 50 cm/20 in pizza
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
60 g 1/2 cup 100
NET CONTENTS
Water 60 g 1/4 cup 100 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
** 0.1 Flour 590 g 100
Forthe Dough Water 420 g 71.19
Water, 21°C/70°F 360 g 11/½ cups 67.92 Fat 20 g 3.39
Instant dry yeast 2.8 g 1 tsp 0.53 Diastatic malt powder 15 g 2.54
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
530 g 32/3 cups 100 Salt 14.5 g
2.46
Pectin 11.8 g 2
Dough relaxer options
see table below Yeast 2.86 g 0.48
High-methoxyl pectin 11.8 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.23
Diastatic malt powder 15 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 2.83 We added pectin to this recipe to increase the volume
of the crust.
Fine salt 14.5 g 2/½ tsp 2.74
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp + 114 tsp 3.77
Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours,and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Tony Gemignani California Artisan Type 00 Flour Blend.
**You can approximate this small amount of yeast by measuring ½ tsp yeast and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for New York Pizza Dough
on page 132. See the table at right for instructions for adding the dough
relaxer. Add the pectin with the flour.
If you want to make a 400 g or 600 g pizza that will fit in a home oven, we recommend mixing 1.2 kg of dough and dividing it into 2 or 3 pieces because these
smaller yields are hard to mix in a stand mixer. To make a single 400 g or 600 g
dough ball, we suggest that you hand mix the dough (see page 46).
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract pineapple juice, kiwi juice, and papaya juice, see page 1:328.
Papain performed the best in our tests.
INGREDIENT ADD TO...
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
Papaya juice, fresh 0.03 the water
Pineapple juice, fresh 0.01 the water
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08 the water
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 135
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
DIRECT NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH ☑
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 1%
Water, 21°C/70°F 410 g 134 cups 69.49
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 6h
one 50 cm/20 in pizza
Instant dry yeast 2.8 g 1 tsp 0.47
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
590 g 4 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 1%
Diastatic malt powder 15 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp 2.54 Flour 590 g
100
Fine salt 14.5 g 2/½ tsp 2.46 Water 410 g 69.49
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.39 Fat 20 g 3.39
Yield: ~1 kg Diastatic malt powder 15 g
2.54
Salt 14.5 g
2.46
Yeast 2.8 g 0.47
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page I:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page I:ххіі.
*We recommend using Tony Gemignani California Artisan Type 00 Flour Blend.
After preshaping, you can also cold-proof this dough at 4° C/39° F for 1-2 d for
even better baking and texture results. If you cold-proof the dough, remove it from
refrigeration 11/½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and is easier to stretch out.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and malt
powder, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; mix
on medium speed to low gluten development; add
the salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil with the machine running on
medium speed, and mix until the dough reaches full
gluten development; perform the windowpane test to
assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a
lightly floured worktable
BENCH REST
PRESHАPЕ
PROOF
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for
New York Pizza Dough on page 133.
20 min; cover well
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
41/2-5/½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions, see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:71
136
If you want to make a 400 g or 600 g pizza that will fit in a home oven, we recommend mixing 1.2 kg of dough and dividing it into 2 or 3 pieces because these
smaller yields are hard to mix in a stand mixer. To make a single 400 g or 600 g
dough ball, we suggest that you hand mix the dough (see page 46).
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
EMERGENCY NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 2%
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 585 g 41/3 cups 100
Active 10-15 min /
Inactive 2% h
one 50 cm/20 in pizza
Water, 38°C/100°F 405 g 134 cups 69.23
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.42 NET CONTENTS
Fine salt 14 g 2/½ tsp 2.39 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 5.85 g 218 tsp 1 Flour 585 g
100
Yield: ~1 kg Water 405 g 69.23
For salt, flours,and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхіi.
*We recommend using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Flour.
Fat 20 g 3.42
Salt 14 g 2.39
Yeast 5.85 g
1
7
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
combine the flour, water, oil, salt, and yeast in the
mixer's bowl; mix on medium-high speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly
floured worktable
20 min; coverwell
The higher water temperature will help the dough proof faster so that it will be
ready to shape sooner.
If you want to make a 400 g or 600 g pizza that will fit in a home oven, we recommend mixing 1.2 kg of dough and dividing it into 2 or 3 pieces because these
smaller yields are hard to mix in a stand mixer. To make a single 400 g or 600 g
dough ball, we suggest that you hand mix the dough (see page 46).
PRESHAPE
PROOF
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; coverwell
2 h at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:71
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for New Yort
Dough on page 133. БАЗА ПА МИУМ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
доступ ко всей базе 400р
SUBMASTER RECIPЕ
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
APIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 2%
For the Poolish
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 4h
two 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 55 g 13 cup +1 Tbsp 100
Water 55 g 1/4 cup 100 NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g 0.11 Ingredients Weight 1%
For the Dough Flour 605 g 100
Water, 21°C/70°F 330 g 11/3 cup +2 Tbsp 60 Water 385 g 63.63
Instant dry yeast 2g 3/4 tsp 0.36 Salt 11 g 1.82
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein 550 g 4 cups + 1 Tbsp 100 Yeast 2.06 g
0.33
Fine salt 11 g 2 tsp 2
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommended using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring ½ tspyeast and dividing
it into six equal parts. Use one partto make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21° C/70° F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the
flour, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; mix on
medium speed to low gluten development; add the
salt, and mix on medium speed to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options
for New York Pizza Dough on page 133.
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
DIVIDE
PRESHAРE
PROOF
500 g
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or ona sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
3-3/½ h at 21°C/70° F, covered, or 2-21/½ h at 27° C/
80°F and 65% RH; for shaping instructions, see page
3:66; for assembly and baking instructions, see page
3:73
138 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
APIZZA DOUGH VARIATION
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 1%
Water, 21°C/70°F 310 g 1/3 cups 50.41
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 4h
two 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 3 g 178 tsp 0.49
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 615 g 41/2 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
Fine salt 6g 1 tsp 0.98 Ingredients Weight %
Yield: ~900 g
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommended using Central Milling OrganicArtisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for Apizza Dough on previous
page. Omit the poolish, and divide the dough into two 450 g pieces.
The pizza that results from this dough is similar to the ones that we sampled
during our trip to New Haven, CT (see page 1:228).
Flour
Water
Salt
Yeast
615 g 100
310 g
50.41
6g 0.98
3g 0.49
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 139
7
SUBMASTER RECIPE
QUAD CITIES PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15 min/
Inactive 48% h
two 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Flour, 11.5%-14% protein* 60 g 1/½ cup 100
Water 60 g 14 cup 100 NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
0.1 Ingredients Weight 8
For the Dough Flour 590 g 100
Water, 21°C/70°F 260 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 49.06 Water 332.6 g
56.37
Instant dry yeast 2.8 g 1 tsp 0.53 Sugar 42.8 g
725
Flour, 11.5%-14% protein* 530 g 4 cups 100 Fat 20 g 3.39
Malted barley syrup 60 g 3 Tbsp 11.32 Salt 14.5 g
2.46
Fine salt 14.5 g 21/2 tsp 2.74 Yeast 2.86 g 0.48
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +11/4 tsp 3.77
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour, Tony
Gemignani California Artisan Type 00 Flour Blend, Bouncer Premium High Gluten Flour,
Pillsbury Balancer Hi Gluten Flour, or Grain Craft Power High Gluten Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount of yeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21° C/70° F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and
malt syrup, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass;
mix on medium speed to low gluten development;
add the salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil while the machine is running
on medium speed, and mix to full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured
worktable
This recipe is our interpretation of Quad Cities dough. The
variation on the next page more closely replicates what pizza
makers in Quad Cities shared with us.
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
DIVIDE 500 g
PRESHAРЕ ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
PROOF 1-2 d at 4° C/39°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:84
140 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
QUAD CITIES PIZZA DOUGH VARIATION
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Water, 21°C/70°F 375 g 12/3 cups 61.47
TOTAL TIME
Active 10 min/
Inactive 4h
YIELD/SHAPE
two 40 cm/16 in pizzas
Malted barley syrup 30 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 4.9
Instant dry yeast 2.2 g 3/4 tsp 0.36 NET CONTENTS
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 610 g 4/½ cups 100 Ingredients Weight %
Fine salt 12.2 g 28 tsp 2 Flour 610 g 100
Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommended using CentralMilling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
The optional cold-proofing provides good extensibility and makes the dough
easy to stretch. If you cold-proof the dough, remove it from refrigeration 11/½-2h
before shaping so it warms up and is easier to stretch out.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for New York Pizza
Dough on page 133.
This recipe makes a dough that is closer to the pizzas that we
tried during our visit to Quad Cities, a region of five cities in
lowa and Illinois (see page 1:248).
Water 381 g 62.45
Sugar 21 g 3.44
Salt 12.2 2
Yeast 2.2 0.36
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
combine the water, malt syrup, and yeast in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour,
and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; autolyse
for 30 min; add the salt, and mix on low speed until
incorporated; mix on medium speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly
oiled tub
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
1h at 21°C/70°F; cover well
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
500 g
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
3 h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 2 h 40 min at
27°C/80° F and 65% RH; optional cold-proof for 2 d at
4° C/39°F; for shaping instructions, see page 3:66; for
assembly and baking instructions, see page 3: 84
141
7
MASTER RECIPE
ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48% h
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
For the Poolish
High-gluten bread flour, 13%- 75 g 1/2 cup 100
14% protein* NET CONTENTS
Water 75 g 1/3 cup 100 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 0.08 g
** 0.11 Flour 625 g 100
For the Dough Water 450 g
72
Water, 21° C/70°F 375 g 12/3 cups 68.18 Fat 20 g 3.2
Instant dry yeast 2.6 g 1 tsp 0.47 Diastatic malt powder 13 g 2.08
High-gluten bread flour, 13%- 550 g 334 cups 100 Salt 12.5 g 2
14% protein* Yeast 2.68 g 0.43
Diastatic malt powder 13 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2.36
Fine salt 12.5 g 214 tsp 2.27
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.64
Yield: ~1.1 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхіі.
*We recommend using Giusto's High Performer High Protein Unbleached Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing it into four equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70°F, covered
combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and
malt powder, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass;
mix on medium speed to low gluten development;
add the salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil while the machine is running
on medium speed, and mix until the dough reaches full
gluten development; perform the windowpane test to
assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a
lightly floured worktable
BENCH REST
DIVIDE
PRESHAPЕ
PROOF
The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for the
dough hook to catch all the ingredients and mix a uniform
dough in an 8 qt bowl.
This is an easy-to-work-with dough and an excellent
choice for home cooks.
20 min: cover well
360 g
ball (see pages 61–62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mistwith water; cover well
1-2 d at 4° C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:77
142
Yield/Size Table
Multiply each ingredient in the Artisan Pizza Dough master
recipe by the number below to obtain the amount of dough
to yield three pizzas in different sizes. For ingredients in
small amounts (such as salt, yeast, or diastatic malt powder),
precision is key. You should round to the nearest hundredth
of a gram.
PIZZA DIAMETER DOUGH WEIGHT MULTIPLIER
40 cm/16 in 400 g 1.1
45 cm/18 in 470 g
1.3
50 cm/20 in 500 g 1.4
55 cm/22 in 580 g 1.6
60 cm/24 in 620 g 1.7
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
3 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 4 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 2 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 7 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
1 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 5 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 1 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 11 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
2 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 10 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 2 min. Add the oil while the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mixto full gluten development, about 15 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and
mix on low speed to a shaggy mass, about
3 min. Mix on medium speed to low gluten
development, about 10 min. Add the salt, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated, about 5 min. Add the oilwhile the
machine is running on medium speed, and
mix to full gluten development, about 20 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity willvary
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour and malt powder, and mix
on low speed to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Add
the salt and oil, and mix on medium speed
to full gluten development, about 15 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
Low gluten development
Full gluten development
PREP
Combine the flour, water, and yeast for the
poolish, and mix to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer the poolish to an airtight container,
cover, and let it ripen at 21° C/70° F for 12 h
before using (see page 1:300).
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour
the oil toward the center of the dough rather than
to the outside of the dough. This helps keep it from
sloshing around the bowl and makes it easier for the
mixer to fully incorporate it into the dough.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
XIM
3
2 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
3 Transfer the dough to a lightly floured
worktable. Cover well with a plastic bag or
tarp.
BENCH REST
4 Bench rest for 20 min.
We typically use a dough hook to mix all our
medium-crust pizza doughs. If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough for the dough hook to mix
them well in a stand mixer or commercial planetary
mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to mix the
ingredients uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass (the dough is sticky and wet, and there
are no visible clumps or unincorporated water),
switch to a hook attachment.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 143
7
DIVIDE PRESHAPE
7
5 Divide into three 360 g pieces (see page
55).
6 Preshape the dough into a ball (see pages
61-62).
7 Place in a tub or on a sheet pan. Spray a
very light mist of water over the dough.
8
Cover the tub well orwrap the sheet pan
with plastic wrap.
COLD-PROOF
9 Cold-proof the dough, covered, for 1-2 d at
4°C/39°F.
Cold-proofing will help the dough relax without
proofing it too far, and it will make it easier to work
with. In our tests, letting the dough proof in refrigeration for at least 24 h produceda better pizza dough
that was easier to stretch and had better volume and
a crispier crust.
10 Remove the dough from refrigeration
11/½-2 h before shaping so the dough
warms up and is easier to stretch out.
Although we recommend proofing the dough for
1-2 d, you can reball the dough after 2 d and return it
to refrigeration for up to another 3 d (5 d total).
11 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:66. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:77.
144 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48% h
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
High-gluten bread flour, 13%--
14% protein*
75 g 1/½ cup 100
NET CONTENTS
Water 75 g 13 cup 100 Ingredients Weight 3
Instant dry yeast 0.08 g
0.11 Flour 625 g
100
For the Dough Water 450 g 72
Water, 21°C/70°F 375 g 12/3 cups 68.18 Fat 20 g 3.2
Instant dry yeast 2.6 g 1 tsp 0.47
Diastatic malt powder 13 g 2.08
High-gluten bread flour, 13%-
14% protein.*
550 g 334 cups 100 Pectin 12.5 g 2
Salt 12.5 g 2
Dough relaxer options
see table below Yeast 2.68 g 0.43
High-methoxyl pectin 12.5 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.2
Diastatic malt powder 13 g 1 Tbsp + 1½ tsp 2.36
Fine salt 12.5 g 214 tsp 2.27
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.64
Yield: ~1.1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xхії.
*We recommend using Giusto's High Performer High Protein Unbleached Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring tsp yeastand dividing it into four equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for Artisan Pizza Dough on
page 142. See the table at right for instructions on adding the dough
relaxer. Add the pectin with the flour.
We added pectin to this recipe to increase the volume of the crust.
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. Bromelain and papain
performed best in our tests.
INGREDIENT % ADD TO
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 145
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
HIGH-HYDRATION ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
☑
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 48%h
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
High-gluten bread flour, 13%- 65 g 1/2 cup 100
14% protein*
NET CONTENTS
Water 65 g 14 cup 100 Ingredients Weight %
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
** 0.11 Flour 535 g 100
For the Dough Water 450 g 84.11
Water, 21°C/70°F 385 g
12/3 cups 81.91
Fat 17 g 3.18
Instant dry yeast 2.1 g 3/4 tsp 0.45 Salt 11 g 2.06
High-gluten bread flour, 13%-
14% protein*
470 g 314 cups 100
Diastatic malt powder 11 g 2.06
Yeast Diastatic malt powder 11 g 23/4 tsp 2.34 2.17 g
0.41
Fine salt 11 g 2 tsp 2.34
Extra-virgin olive oil 17 g 1 Tbsp +1/½ tsp 3.62
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Giusto's High Performer High Protein Unbleached Flour.
**You can approximate this smallamount of yeast by measuring a tsp yeast and dividing it into five equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for
Artisan Pizza Dough on page 142. Divide the
dough into 330 g pieces.
As the extra water evaporates during baking, it really opens
up the dough, yielding a bubbly crust and a crumb structure
that is light as air. We don't recommend this variation for
beginners; the more water a dough contains, the harder it is
to handle.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DIRECT ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ %
Water, 21°C/70°F 450 g 2 cups 72
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 6 h
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 2.6 g 1 tsp 0.42
High-gluten bread flour, 13%-
14% protein*
625 g 42/3 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight %
Diastatic malt powder 13 g 1 Tbsp +1/4 tsp 2.08 Flour 625 g 100
Fine salt 12.5 g 21/4 tsp 2
Water 450 g
72
Extra-virgin olive oil 20g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.2 Fat 20 g 3.2
Yield: ~1.1 kg 13 g 2.08
Salt
Yeast
12.5 g 2
2.6 g 0.42
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Giusto's High Performer High Protein Unbleached Flour.
After preshaping, you can also cold-proof this dough at 4°C/39° F for 1-2 d for
even better baking and texture results. If you cold-proofthe dough, remove the
dough from refrigeration 11/½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and is easier to
stretch out.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour and malt
powder, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; mix
on medium speed to low gluten development; add
the salt, and mix on medium speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil with the machine running on
medium speed, and mix the dough until it reaches full
gluten development; perform the windowpane test to
assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a
lightly floured worktable
BENCH REST
DIVIDE
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
Diastatic malt powder
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options
for Artisan Pizza Dough on page 143.
20 min; cover well
360 g
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
4/½-5/½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions, see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:77
146 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
Direct artisan pizza dough
EMERGENCY ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 575 g 414 cups 100
TOTAL TIME
Active 10-15 min/
YIELD/SHAPE
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
Inactive 2% h
Water, 38°C/100°F 415 g 134 cups +1 Tbsp 72.17
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.48 NET CONTENTS
Diastatic malt powder 11.5 g 23/4 tsp + /8 tsp 2 Ingredients Weight
Salt 11.5 g 2 tsp 2 Flour 575 g
100
Instant dry yeast 4.6 g 11/2+ 1/8 tsp 0.80 Water 415 g 72.17
Yield: ~1 kg Fat 20 g 3.48
Salt 11.5 g
2
Diastatic malt powder 11.5 g
2
Yeast 4.6 g 0.80
For salt, flours, andother notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommended using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
The higher water temperature will help the dough prooffaster so that it will be
ready to shape sooner.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Artisan Pizza Dough
on page 143.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
DIVIDE
combine the flour, water, oil, malt powder, salt, and
yeast in the mixer's bowl; mix on medium-high speed
to full gluten development; perform the windowpane
test to assess gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly floured worktable
20 min; cover well
330 g
PRESHAPE ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
PROOF 2 hat 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:66; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:77
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 147
7
MASTER RECIPE
FOCACCIA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 26
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME
(☑
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6h
YIELD/SHAPE
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in focaccia
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 65 g 1/½ cup 100
15% protein* NET CONTENTS
Water 65 g 14 cup 100 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
** 0.11 Flour 495 g 100
For the Dough Water 432 g 87.27
Water, 21°C/70°F 335 g 14 cups +3 Tbsp 83.75 Fat 20 g 4.04
Liquid levain, mature
see page 1:304
60 g 14 cup 15 Salt 10 g 2.02
Sugar 3.5 g 0.71
Malted barley syrup 5g 3/4 tsp 1.25
Yeast 1.27 g 0.25
Instant dry yeast 1.2 g /2 tsp 0.3
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
400 g 234 cups 100
Fine salt 10 g 13/4 tsp 2.5
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 5
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, fAours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using GeneralMills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount ofyeast by measuring % tspyeast and dividing
it intofive equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70° F, covered
combine 285 g (14 cups) of the water with the levain,
malt syrup, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass; autolyse 30 min; meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining water; add the salt
mixture, and mix on low speed until it is fully incorporated; mix on high speed to medium gluten development; add the oil in a slow stream while the machine
is running on medium speed, and mix until it is fully
incorporated; transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and shape
into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold
BULK
FERMENT
The 1 kg yield ofthe base recipe is not enough for
the dough hook to catch all the ingredients and
mix a uniform dough in an 8 qt bowl.
You can divide this dough in half and make two
quarter-sheet-pan-sized focaccias, if desired.
We like using focaccia pans (see page 68), because
the black steel will make for a crispier crust
21/½ h at 21°C/70°F; cover well; perform 4 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for30 min after the final fold; generously oil a half
sheet pan
PRESHAPE transfer the dough to the prepared pan seam side
down, trying to maintain the rectangular shape; coat
the surface of the dough with more oil; stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fill the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
PROOF 3 h at 21° C/70°F, covered, or 2 h at 27°C/80°F and
65% RH; halfway through proofing, gently but assertively stretch the dough out again to fill the pan as evenly
as possible; forshaping instructions, see page 3:117; for
assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:117
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine 285 g (14 cups) of the water
with the levain, malt syrup, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 5 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining
water. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high
speed to medium gluten development, about
10 min. Add the oil in a slow stream while the
machine is running on medium speed, and mix
until it is fully incorporated.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: combine 285 g (114 cups) of the water
with the levain, malt syrup, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 1 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining
water. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high
speed to medium gluten development, about
3 min. Add the oil in a slow stream while the
machine is running on medium speed, and mix
until it is fully incorporated.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: combine 285 g (1½ cups) of the water
with the levain, malt syrup, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve
the yeast. Add the flour, and mix on medium
speed to a shaggy mass, about 5 min. Autolyse
for 30 min. Meanwhile, stir the salt into the
remaining water. Add the salt mixture, and
mix on medium speed until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high speed to medium gluten
development, about 10 min. Add the oil in
a slow stream while the machine is running
on medium speed, and mix until it is fully
incorporated.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: combine 285 g (14 cups) of the water
with the levain, malt syrup, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 8 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining
water. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high
speed to medium gluten development, about
15 min. Add the oil in a slow stream while the
machine is running on medium speed, and mix
until it is fully incorporated.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine 285 g (114 cups) of the water
with the levain, malt syrup, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on medium speed
to a shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining
water. Add the salt mixture and oil, and mix on
high speed to medium gluten development,
about 1 h 2 min.
If you are mixing the dough with a diving arm mixer,
it may feel tighter than doughs made with the other
mixers.
Medium gluten development
PREP
1 Combine the flour, water, and yeast for the
poolish, and mix to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer the poolish to an airtight container,
cover, and let it ripen at 21°C/70° Ffor
12-16 h before using (see page 1:300).
You will need to mix this dough on high speed to
achieve medium gluten development.
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour
it toward the center of the dough ratherthan to the
outside. This helps keep it from sloshing around the
bowl and makes it easier for the mixer to fully incorporate it into the dough.
MIX
2 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
3 Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled tub.
Shape it into a rectangle. Perform a fouredge fold. Cover well with plastic wrap.
If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough for
the dough hook to mix them well in a stand mixer or
commercial planetary mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to mixthe ingredients uniformly. Once
you have a homogeneous mass (the dough is sticky
and wet, and there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook attachment.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model and
yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and medium
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development
(see page 30).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 149
7
BULK FERMENT
4a 4b
4 Bulk ferment, covered, for 21/½ h at 21°C/
70°F; perform 4 four-edge folds (1 fold
every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full
gluten development.
For batches larger than 1 kg, we suggest you use
the following steps (this assumes you have made
additional dough in 1 kg increments). We devised
this method because it is very hard to maintain an
even piece of dough in large batches. Shaping it with
the last four-edge fold in the pan helps keep it evenly
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development. Rest the dough, covered, for
30 min after the final fold.
rectangular and also evenly thick. It will relax in the
pan, which will make the task ofshaping easier.
1.30 min after performing the 4th four-edge fold,
turn the dough out of the tub onto a lightly oiled
worktable and divide the dough into 1 kg pieces,
keeping the dough as rectangular as possible.
5
Drizzle olive oil evenly over a half sheet
pan.
2. Place each piece of dough on a well-oiled half
sheet pan and perform a four-edge fold. Coat the
dough with oil and rest for 30 min.
3. Stipple the dough and extend it to fill out the
pan completely and evenly. Proceed with the Proof
instructions.
PRESHAPE
7 Gently but assertively stretch the dough to
fit the pan. Make sure the corners are sharp
and fill out the corners of the pan.
8 Drizzle the surface of the dough with more
oil and stretch the dough as much as you
can without damaging it to try to fill the pan
evenly.
PROOF
6 Transfer the dough to the center of the
prepared pan seam side down, trying to
maintain the rectangular shape.
When you are stippling the dough, don't force it or
the dough will tear. Let it relax for 15-20 min before
stretching it again.
9 Proof the dough, covered, for 3 h at 21° C/
70° F or for 2 h at 27°C/80°F and 65% RH.
Halfway through proofing, gently but
assertively stretch the dough out again to
fill the pan as evenly as possible.
150 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
10 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:117. Assemble and bake the focсасcia according to the instructions on page
3:117.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST FOCACCIA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
For the Poolish
TOTAL TIME
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6h
YIELD/SHAPE
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in focaccia
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 65 g 1/½ cup 100
15% protein* NET CONTENTS Water 65 g 14 cup 100 Ingredients Weight
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
0.11 Flour 495 g 100
For the Dough Water 432 g
87.27
Water, 21°C/70°F 335 g 114 cups +3 Tbsp 83.75 Fat 20 g
4.04
Liquid levain, mature
see page 1:304
60 g 1/4 cup 15 Salt 10 g 2.02
Malted barley syrup 5g 3/4 tsp 1.25 Sugar 3.5 g 0.71
Instant dry yeast 1.2 g 1/2 tsp 0.3 Pectin 3.2 g 0.64
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
400 g 23/4 cups 100 Yeast 1.27 g 0.26
Dough relaxer options
see table below
High-methoxyl pectin 3.2 g 1 tsp 0.8
Fine salt 10 g 134 tsp 2.5
Shortening, lard, or ghee, softened 20 g 1 Tbsp +1½ tsp 5
Yield: ~1 kg
Forsalt, flours, andother notes,see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour.
*You can approximate this smallamount of yeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing it
into five equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for Focaccia Dough on page
148. See the table at right for instructions for adding the dough relaxer.
Add the pectin with the flour.
We added pectin to this recipe to increase the volume of the crust.
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract
pineapple juice and kiwi juice, see page 1:328. Bromelain
performed best in our tests.
INGREDIENT ADD TO...
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Pineapple juice, fresh 0.01 the remaining
water
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08
Papain, powdered
Adolph's meat tenderizer
0.01
0.01 the flour
the remaining
water
the flour
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DIRECT FOCACCIA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME %
Water, 21°C/70°F 430 g 134 cups +2 Tbsp 86.87
Active 20-25 min /
Inactive 6h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in focaccia
Malted barley syrup 5g 3/4 tsp 1.01
Instant dry yeast 2.5 g 1 tsp 0.51 NET CONTENTS
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 495 g 31½ cups +2 Tbsp 100 Ingredients Weight
15% protein* Flour 495 g 100
Fine salt 10 g 134 tsp 2.02 Water 432 g 87.27
Extra-virgin olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 4.04 Fat 20 g 4.04
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Focaccia Dough on page
148. Omit the poolish and levain.
Salt 10 g
2.02
Sugar 3.5 g 0.71
Yeast 2.5 g 0.51
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 151
7
MASTER RECIPE
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
For the Poolish 18 in by 13 in pizza
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 40 g 1/4 cup +2 tsp 100 15% protein* NET CONTENTS
Water 40 g 2 Tbsp + 2 tsp 100 Ingredients Weight 6
Instant dry yeast 0.05 g
** 0.13 Flour 395 g 100
Forthe Dough Water 295 g 74.68
Water, 21°C/70°F 255 g 1 cup +11/½ Tbsp 71.83 Fat 15 g 3.8
Instant dry yeast 1.95 g 3/4 tsp 0.54 Salt 7.9 g 2
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
355 g 21/½ cups 100 Yeast 1.95 g 0.49
Fine salt 7.9 g 14 tsp + Ys tsp 2.23
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 tbsp + 14 tsp 4.23
Yield: ~700g
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:ххіi.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour.
**You can approximate this smallamount ofyeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing
it into sixequal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
The 700 g yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough
hook to catch all the ingredients and mix a uniform dough in
an 8 qt bowl.
If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough forthe dough
hook to mix them well in a stand mixer or commercial
planetary mixer, usea paddle attachment initially to mix the
ingredients uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass
(the dough is sticky and wet, and there are no visible clumps or
unincorporated water), switch to a hook attachment.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21° C/70° F, covered
MIX combine the water, yeast, and poolish in the mixer's
bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour,
and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass; autolyse for 30
min; add the salt, and mix on low speed until it is fully
incorporated; add the oil in a slow stream while the
mixer is running on low speed, and mix until it is fully
incorporated; mix on medium speed to medium gluten
development; transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and shape
into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold
BULK
FERMENT
152
2/½ h at 21°C/70°F, cover well; perform 4 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for 30 min after the final fold; generously oil a half
sheet pan
PRESHAРЕ transfer the dough to the prepared pan seam side
down, trying to maintain the rectangular shape; coat
the surface of the dough with more oil; stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fillthe pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
PROOF
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
3 hat 21°C/70°F, covered, or 2 h at 27°C/80°F and
65% RH; halfway through proofing, stretch the dough
gently but assertively out again to fill the pan as evenly
as possible; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:133
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 12
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 5 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Add the salt, and mix on low speed until it is
fully incorporated. Add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed,
and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on
medium speed to medium gluten development, about 5 min.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 2.15, but do not exceed 2.5
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 1 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Add the salt, and mix on low speed until it is
fully incorporated. Add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed,
and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on
medium speed to medium gluten development, about 3 min.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 9 but do not exceed 11
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 8 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Add the salt, and mix on low speed until it is
fully incorporated. Add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed,
and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on
medium speed to medium gluten development, about 15 min.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 12
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, about 8 min. Autolyse for 30 min.
Add the salt, and mix on low speed until it is
fully incorporated. Add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed,
and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on
medium speed to medium gluten development, about 15 min.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 3 but do not exceed 4
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine the water, yeast, and poolish
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast. Add the flour, and mix on low speed to a
shaggy mass, 2-3 min. Autolyse for 30 min. Add
the salt and oil, and mix on medium speed to
medium gluten development, about 37 min.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model and
yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and medium
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development.
Shaggy mass
PREP
1 Combine the flour, water, and yeast for the
poolish, and mix to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer the poolish to an airtight container,
cover, and let it ripen at 21°C/ 70° F for
12-16 h before using (see page 1:300).
Add salt Medium gluten development
MIX
2 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above. 3
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour
it toward the center of the dough ratherthan to the
outside. This helps keep it from sloshing around the
bowl, and makes it easier for the mixer to fully incorporate it into the dough.
Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled tub.
Shape the dough into a rectangle. Perform
a four-edge fold. Coverwell with plastic
wrap.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 153
7
BULK FERMENT
4a
4
PRESHAРЕ
4b
Bulk ferment, covered, for 21½ h at 21° C/
70°F; perform 4 four-edge folds (1 fold
every 30 min afterthe first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full
gluten development. Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development.
Rest the dough, covered, for 30 min after
the final fold.
5 Drizzle olive oil evenly over the base of two
half sheet pans.
When you are stippling the dough, don't force it or
the dough will tear. Let it relax for 15-20 min before
stretching it again.
You can divide this dough in half and make two
quarter-sheet-pan-sized pizzas, if desired.
6
7
Transfer the dough to the center of the
prepared pans seam side down, trying to
maintain the rectangular shape.
Coat the surface of the dough with more
oil, and gently but assertively stretch the
dough to fit the pan. Make sure the corners
are sharp and fill out the corners of the pan.
PROOF
8 Proof the dough, covered, for 3 h at 21°C/
70° F or for 2 h at 27° C/80° F and 65% RH.
Halfway through proofing, gently but
assertivelystretch the dough out again to
fill the pan completely and as evenly as
possible.
154
9 Assemble and bake the pizza according
to the instructions on page 3:133.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST NEW YORK SQUARE
PIZZA DOUGН
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6 h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in pizza
For the Poolish
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein* 40 g 14 cup +2 tsp 100 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 1%
Water 40 g 2 Tbsp + 2 tsp 100 Flour 395 g 100
Instant dry yeast 0.05 g 0.13 Water 295 g 74.68
For the Dough Fat 15 g 3.8
Water, 21°C/70°F 255 g 1 cup + 17/2 Tbsp 71.83 Pectin 8 g 2.03
Instant dry yeast 1.95 g 3/4 tsp 0.54 Salt 7.9 g
2
Dough relaxer options
see table below Yeast 1.95 g 0.49
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%-
15% protein*
355 g 2/2 cups 100
High-methoxyl pectin 8 g 234 tsp +18 tsp 2.25
We added pectin to this recipe to increase the
volume of the crust.
Fine salt 7.9 g 114 tsp + 1% tsp 2.23
Shortening, lard, or clarified
butter, melted and cooled
15 g 1 tbsp +4 tsp 4.23
Yield: ~700 g
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour.
**You can approximate this smallamount ofyeast by measuring %tsp yeast and dividing it into six equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for New York Square Pizza
Dough on page 152. See the table at right for instructions for adding the
dough relaxer. Add the pectin with the flour.
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract kiwi
juice and papaya juice, see page 1:328. Papaya juice and
meat tenderizer performed best in our tests.
INGREDIENT 1% ADD TO...
Papaya juice, fresh 0.03 the water
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08 the water
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 155
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DIRECT NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 1%
Water, 21°C/70°F 295 g 114 cups 74.68
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in pizza
Instant dry yeast 1.95 g 3/4 tsp 0.49
High-gluten bread flour, 13.5%- 395 g
100 23/4cups NET CONTENTS
15% protein* Ingredients Weight 1%
Fine salt 7.9 g 1/4 tsp + 1s tsp 2
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 tbsp + 1½ tsp 3.8
Flour
Water
395 g 100
295 g 74.68
Yield: ~700 g
Fat 15 g 3.8
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for New York Square Pizza
Dough on page 152. Omit the poolish.
Salt 7.9 g
2
Yeast 1.95 g 0.49
156 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
SFINCIONE DOUGH (AKA SFINCIUNI DOUGH)
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME %
Water, 21°C/70°F 390 g 134 cups 68.42
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 3% h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/18 in by
13 in pizza
Instant dry yeast 5g 134 tsp 0.88
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 570 g 44 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
Fine salt 11 g 2 tsp 1.93 Ingredients Weight
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 5.26 Flour 570 g 100
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommended using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Focaccia Dough on
page 149.
Water 390 g
68.42
Fat 30 g 5.26
Salt 11 g 1.93
Yeast 5g 0.88
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass; add the salt, and mix on
medium speed to medium gluten development; add
the oil in a slow stream while the mixer is running on
low speed, and mix until it is fully incorporated; mix
on medium speed to full gluten development; perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten development
(see page 30); transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and shape
into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold; generously
oil a half sheet pan
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
PRESHAPE transfer the dough to the prepared pan seam side
down, trying to maintain the rectangular shape; coat
the surface of the dough with more oil; stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fill the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
PROOF 2-3 h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 1-2h at 27°C/80°F
and 65% RH; for shaping instructions, see page 3:125;
for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:125
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 157
7
MASTER RECIPE
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 5%h
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm/
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 24 in by 8 in pizzas %
Water, 21°C/70°F 480 g 2 cups 76.19
Instant dry yeast 3.7 g 174 tsp +18 tsp 0.59 NET CONTENTS
Liquid levain, mature
see page 1:304
220 g 1 cup 34.92 Ingredients Weight %
Flour 740 g 100 Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein, or 630 g 42/3 cups 100
00 flour* Water 590 g 79.73
Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 1/4 tsp + 1% tsp 0.24 Fat 30 g
4.02
Fine salt 18.5 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2.94 Salt 18.5 g 2.5
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 4.76 Yeast 3.7 g 0.5
Yield: ~1.4 kg Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g
0.2
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour.
This dough uses the double hydration method (see page 41) and is mixed to
medium gluten development twice in order to fully incorporate all of the water.
You will need to mix this dough on high speed to achieve medium gluten development.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BULK
FERMENT
combine 380 g (12/3 cups) of the water with the yeast
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast;
add the levain, flour, and malt powder, and mix on low
speed to low gluten development; autolyse 30 min;
meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining water; mix
the dough on medium speed to medium gluten development; add the salt mixture, and mix on low speed
until it is fully incorporated; add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed, and mix until
it is fully incorporated; mix on high speed to medium
gluten development; transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and
shape into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold
2/½ h at21°C/70° F; cover well; perform 4 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for 30 min after the final fold; generously oil the pan(s)
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in: do not divide
60 cm by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in: 700 g
perform a four-edge fold; transfer the dough to the
prepared pan(s) seam side down, trying to maintain the
rectangular shape; rest for 30 min, covered; stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fill the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
3 hat 21°C/70°F, covered, or 2 h at 27° C/80°F and
65% RH; after the first hour, using flat hands, gently but
assertively stretch the dough out again to fill the pan as
evenly as possible, being careful not to tear the dough;
for shaping instructions, see page 3:141; for assembly
and baking instructions, see page 3:141
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 5
Mix: combine 380 g (12/3 cups) of the water
with the yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk
to dissolve the yeast. Add the levain, flour,
and malt powder, and mix on low speed to
low gluten development, 7-8 min. Autolyse
for 30 min. Meanwhile, stir the salt into the
remaining water. Mix the dough on medium
speed to medium gluten development, about
10 min. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Add the
oil in a slow stream while the mixer is running
on low speed, and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high speed to medium gluten
development, about 10 min.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this recipe by 1.25
Mix: combine 380 g (123 cups) of the water
with the yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk
to dissolve the yeast. Add the levain, flour,
and malt powder, and mix on low speed to
low gluten development, 7-8 min. Autolyse
for 30 min. Meanwhile, stir the salt into the
remaining water. Mix the dough on medium
speed to medium gluten development, 8-
10 min. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Add the
oil in a slow stream while the mixer is running
on low speed, and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high speed to medium gluten
development, about 3 min.
Make sure the dough does not come off the mixer at
a temperature lower than 18° C/64° F or higher than
24°C/75°F (see page 32).
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 3 but do not exceed 4
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by 7
Mix: combine 380 g (123 cups) of the water
with the yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk
to dissolve the yeast. Add the levain, flour,
and malt powder, and mix on low speed to
low gluten development, 6-8 min. Autolyse
for 30 min. Meanwhile, stir the salt into the
remaining water. Mix the dough on medium
speed to medium gluten development, about
10 min. Add the salt mixture, and mix on low
speed until it is fully incorporated. Add the
oil in a slow stream while the mixer is running
on low speed, and mix until it is fully incorporated. Mix on high speed to medium gluten
development, about 10 min.
Add levain to the yeast mixture before
adding the flour and malt powder
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by 2
industrial-sized mixers: capacity will vary
Mix: combine 380 g (12/3 cups) of the water
with the yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk
to dissolve the yeast. Add the levain, flour,
and malt powder, and mix on low speed to
shaggy mass, 2-3 min.Autolyse for 30 min.
Meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining
water. Add the salt mixture and oil, and mix on
high speed to medium gluten development,
about 52 min.
If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough for
the dough hook to mix them well in a stand mixer or
commercial planetary mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients uniformly. Once
you have a homogeneous mass (the dough is sticky
and wet, and there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook attachment.
Add oil in slow stream
MIX
1 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
2 Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled tub.
Shape the dough into a rectangle. Perform
a four-edge fold. Cover well with plastic
wrap.
When you are adding the oil to the mixer, try to pour
it toward the center of the dough rather than to the
outside. This helps keep it from sloshing around the
bowl and makes it easier for the mixer to fully incorporate the oil into the dough.
2
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
The larger the yield, the longerthe dough will take
to mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary
from machine to machine. Whatever the model
and yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development.
159
7
BULK FERMENT
3
Bulk ferment, covered, for 21½ h at 21°C/
70° F; perform 4 three-edge folds (1 fold
every 30 min after the first 30 min). Rest the
dough, covered, for 30 min after the final
fold. Perform the windowpane test to
assess full gluten development (see page
30).
PRESHAPE
4 Turn the dough onto a lightly oiled worktable, trying to keep it as rectangular as
possible.
5 Generously oil the Roman al taglio pan(s).
For the large pizza we use a full-sized pizza al taglio
pan measuring 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in and
made from blue steel. The small pizzas are made
in half-sized pizza al taglio pans measuring 60 cm
by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in. For more on where to find
these pans, see Resources, page 3:377.
DIVIDE
6
$Brecknet 700
Do not divide for a 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in
by 16 in pizza. Divide into two 700 g pieces
for 60 cm by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in pizzas
(see page 55).
PROOF
9
7 Perform a four-edge fold. Transfer the
dough to the center of the prepared pan(s)
seam side down, trying to maintain the
rectangular shape. Rest for 30 min,
covered.
8 Gently but assertively stretch the dough to
fit the pan. Make sure the corners are sharp
and fill out the corners of the pan. Do not
force the dough if it doesn't stretch all the
way out to fill the pan on the first try.
9 Proof the dough, covered, for 3 h at21°C/
70° F or 2 h at 27° C/80° F and 65% RH.
After the first hour, using flat hands, gently
but assertively stretch the dough out again
to fill the pan as evenly as possible, being
careful not to tear the dough.
10 Shape according to the instructions on
page 3:141. Assemble and bake the pizza
according to the instructions on page
3:141.
160 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
When you are stippling the dough, don't force it or
the dough will tear. Let it relax for 15-20 min before
stretching it again.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST HIGH-HYDRATION
AL TAGLIO PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME %
Water 480 g 2 cups 76.19
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 5%h
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm/
24 in by 8 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 3.7g 114 tsp +1/8 tsp 0.59
Liquid levain, mature
see page 1:304
220 g 1 cup 34.92 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 96
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein,
or 00 flour*
630 g 42/3 cups 100 Flour 740 g 100
Water 590 g 79.73 Dough relaxer options
see table below Fat 30 g
4.02
High-methoxyl pectin 14.8 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 2.25 Salt 18.5 g 2.5
Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 14 tsp + 1/8 tsp 0.25 Pectin 14.8 g 2
Fine salt 18.5 g 1 Tbsp + /4 tsp 2.94 Yeast 3.7 g
0.5
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 4.76 Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 0.2
Yield: ~1.4 kg
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour.
Follow the Mixthrough Proof instructions for High-Hydration al Taglio
Pizza Dough on page 158. See the table at right for instructions for adding
the dough relaxer. Add the pectin with the flour.
We added pectin to this recipe to increase the volume of the crust.
Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract
pineapplejuice and kiwi juice, see page 1:328. Bromelain
performed best in our tests.
INGREDIENT % ADD TО
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Pineapple juice, fresh 0.01 the water
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08 the water
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 161
7
INGREDIENT VARIATION
HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO PIZZA
DOUGH WITH POOLISH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME 8
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 5% h
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm/
24 in by 8 in pizzas For the Poolish
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein, or 110 g 34 cup +1 Tbsp 100
00 flour* NET CONTENTS
Water 110 g 1/2 cup 100 Ingredients Weight 1%
Instant dry yeast 0.11 g
** 0.1 Flour 740 g
100
For the Dough Water 590 g 79.73
Water 480 g 2 cups 76.19 Fat 30 g
4.05
Instant dry yeast 3.7 g 114 tsp +8 tsp 0.59 Salt 18.5 g 2.5
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein, or 630 g 42/3 cups 100 Yeast 3.81 g 0.51
00 flour* Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 0.2
Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 1/4 tsp + a tsp 0.2
Fine salt 18.5 g 1 Tbsp + 1½ tsp 2.94
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 4.76
Yield: ~1.4 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour.
**You can approximate this small amount of yeast by measuring % tsp yeast and dividing it into three equal parts. Use one part to make the poolish.
INGREDIENT VARIATION
DIRECT HIGH-HYDRATION AL TAGLIO
PIZZA DOUGH
Mix the flour, water, and yeast for the poolish 12-16 h
before using; ferment at 21°C/70°F, covered. Follow
the Mix through Proof instructions for High-Hydration
al Taglio Pizza Dough on page 158. Replace the levain
with the poolish.
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ %
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 5%h
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm/
24 in by 8 in pizzas Water 600 g 22/3 cups 81.08
Instant dry yeast 3.7 g 114 tsp + 8 tsp 0.5
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein,
or 00 flour*
740 g
100 NET CONTENTS
51/½ cups Ingredients Weight
Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g 1/4 tsp + 8 tsp 0.2 Flour 740 g
100
Fine salt 18.5 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2.5 Water 600 g 81.08
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 4.02 Fat 30 g
4.02
Yield: ~1.4 kg Salt 18.5 g 2.5
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour.
Yeast 3.7 g
0.5
Diastatic malt powder 1.5 g
0.2
162
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough on page 158.
Omit the levain.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENT VARIATION
EMERGENCY HIGH-HYDRATION
AL TAGLIO PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Active: 10-15 min/
Inactive: 3% h
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm/
24 in by 8 in pizzas Water, 21°C/70°F 615 g 22/3 cups 79.35
Instant dry yeast 6.2 g 24 tsp 0.8
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein, 775 g 534 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
or 00 flour* Ingredients Weight
Diastatic malt powder 1.55g 1/4 tsp + a tsp 0.2 Flour 775 g 100
Fine salt 19.4 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 2.5 Water 615 g 79.35
Extra-virgin olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp +1/½ tsp 3.87 Fat 30 g 3.87
Yield: ~1.4 kg Salt 19.4g 2.5
Yeast 6.2 g 0.8
Diastatic malt powder 1.55 g 0.2
Forsalt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for High-Hydration
al Taglio Pizza Dough on page 159.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BULK
FERMENT
combine 495 g (2 cups + 2 Tbsp) of the water with the
yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the
yeast; add the flour and malt powder, and mix on low
speed to low gluten development; autolyse 30 min;
meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining water; mix
the dough on medium speed to medium gluten development; add the salt mixture, and mix on low speed
until it is fully incorporated; add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed, and mix until
it is fully incorporated; mix on high speed to medium
gluten development; transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and
shape into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold
21/½ h at 21°C/70°F; cover well; perform 4 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for 30 min after the final fold; generously oil the pan(s)
DIVIDE
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in: do not divide
60 cm by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in: 700 g
perform a four-edge fold; transfer the dough to the
prepared pan(s) seam side down, trying to maintain the
rectangular shape; rest for 30 min, covered; stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fill the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
1h at 27° C/80° Fand 65% RH; after the first hour,
using flat hands, gently but assertively stretch the
dough out again to fill the pan as evenly as possible,
being careful not to tear the dough; for shaping instructions, see page 3:141; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:141
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 163
7
SUBMASTER RECIPE
ROMAN PIZZA ALLA PALA DOUGH TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Water 470 g 2 cups 73.34
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 5% h
Instant dry yeast 3.8 g 1/½ tsp 0.59
one 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in
pizza or two 60 cm by 20 cm /
24 in by 8 in pizzas
Liquid levain, mature 250 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 39.06
see page 1:304 NET CONTENTS
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein, or 640 g
00 flour*
434 cups 100 Ingredients Weight
Flour Diastatic malt powder 765 g 100
1.6 g 1/4 tsp + 18 tsp 0.25
Water 595 g 77.78 Fine salt 19 g 1 Tbsp + 1½ tsp 2.97
Salt Extra-virgin olive oil 19 g 2.48 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2.34
Fat 15 g 1.96 Yield: ~1.4 kg
Yeast 3.8 g
0.5
Diastatic malt powder 1.6 g
0.2 For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Polselli Super 00 Flour, Caputo Pizza a Metro 00 Flour, Molino
Grassi Slow H24 00 Flour, or Le 5 Stagioni Manitoba 00 Flour.
Make sure to leave enough room in the tub for the dough to expand.
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for High-Hydration
al Taglio Pizza Dough on page 159.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine 380 g (12/3 cups) of the water with the yeast
in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast;
add the levain, flour, and malt powder, and mix on low
speed to low gluten development; autolyse 30 min;
meanwhile, stir the salt into the remaining water; mix
the dough on medium speed to medium gluten development; add the salt mixture, and mix on low speed
until it is fully incorporated; add the oil in a slow stream
while the mixer is running on low speed, and mix until
it is fully incorporated; mix on high speed to medium
gluten development; transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and
shape into a rectangle; perform a four-edge fold
164
BULK
FERMENT
DIVIDE
PRESHAPE
PROOF
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
2 h at 21° C/70°F; cover well; perform 3 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for 30 min after the final fold
60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in: do not divide
60 cm by 20 cm/24 in by 8 in: 700 g
tight oblong bâtard (see page 62); place in a lightly
oiled tub; cover well
3h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 2 h at 27° C/80° F and
65% RH; cold-proof for 16 h at 4°C/39° F, covered,
and then 21/½ h at 27° C/80°F and 65% RH
SUBMASTER RECIPE
PIZZA GOURMET DOUGH TOTAL TIME
☑
YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ
Hong Kong flour or pastry flour 600 g 5 cups 100
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 4% h
four 20 cm/ 8 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 340 g 11/½ cups 56.67
Sugar 64 g 5 Tbsp + 2 tsp 10.67
Fine salt 12 g 21/8 tsp 1.88
NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 6
Baking powder 6.6 g 1/2 tsp 1.1 Flour 600 g 100
Instant dry yeast 6.5 g 24 tsp + 1% tsp 1.08 Water 340 g 56.67
Yield: ~1 kg Sugar 64 g 10.67
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
Hong Kong flouris commonly used for making bao, which share some characteristics with pizza gourmet dough. For more on where to purchase it, see Resources,
page 3:377.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
Salt 12 g 1.88
Baking powder 6.6 g 1.1
Yeast 6.5 g 1.08
MIX combine the flour, water, sugar, salt, baking powder,
and yeast in the mixer's bowl; mix the dough with the
paddle attachment on medium speed to full gluten
development; perform the windowpane test to assess
gluten development (see page 30); transfer to a lightly
floured worktable
DIVIDE 250 g
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
BULK
FERMENT
45 min at 21°C/70° F; cover well
ball (see page 60); flatten to a 2.5 cm/1 in thick disc;
cover well
3½ h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 2/½ h at 27° C/80°F
and 65% RH; for assembly, steaming, and baking
instructions, see page 3:151
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 165
7
MASTER RECIPE
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
Water, 30-30.5°C/85-87°F 405 g 134 cups 70.43
TOTAL TIME
☑
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 3% h
YIELD/SHAPE
two 35 cm by 25 cm/14 in by 10 in
pizzas or three 25 cm by 20 cm/
10 in by 8 in pizzas
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein* 490 g 32/3 cups 85.22
Semolina flour 85 g 1½ cup 14.78
NET CONTENTS Fine salt 11.5 g 2 tsp 2
Ingredients Weight Sugar 8 g 2 tsp 1.39
Bread flour 490 g 85.22
Instant dry yeast 5.2 g 2 tsp 0.9
Semolina flour 85 g 14.78
Yield: ~1 kg Water 405 g 70.43
Salt 11.5 g
2
Sugar 8 g 1.39
Yeast 5.2 g 0.9
For salt,flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:ххії.
*We recommend using Ceresota/Heckers Unbleached All-Purpose Flour. Note that they
call theirflour all-purpose, but the protein content places it in the bread flourcategory. The 1 kg yield of the base recipe is not enough for the dough hook to catch all the
ingredients and mix a uniform dough in an 8 qt bowl.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX pour the water into the mixer's bowl; add the bread
flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar, and yeast, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass; mix on medium speed
to just under full gluten development; perform the
windowpane test to assess gluten development (see
page 30); transfer to a generously oiled tub, turning the
dough over to coat the dough fully with the oil, and
shape into a rectangle
BENCH REST 15 min; cover well; perform a four-edge fold (see page
51); bench rest for 15 min; cover well; generously oil the
Detroit pans
DIVIDE 35 cm by 25 cm /14 in by 10 in: 500 g
25 cm by 20 cm/10 in by 8 in: 330 g
PRESHAPE
PROOF
transfer dough to the prepared pans seam side down,
trying to maintain the rectangular shape; coat the surface of the dough lightly with oil and stretch the dough
gently but assertively without damaging it to fill the pan
evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
3 h at 21° C/70°F, covered, or 21/½ h at 27°C/80°F
and 65% RH; after the first hour, gently but assertively
stretch the dough out again to fill the pan as evenly
as possible; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:109
166 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MACHINE MIXING OPTIONS
SPIRAL MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: pour the water into the mixer's bowl. Add
the bread flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar, and
yeast, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass,
about 5 min. Mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development, about 18 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
STAND MIXER
Weight: 4.5 qt bowl: 1-1.25 kg maximum
8 qt bowl: 1.5-1.75 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 1.5 but do not exceed 1.75
Mix: pour the water into the mixer's bowl. Add
the bread flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar, and
yeast, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass,
about 2 min. Mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development, about 4 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough for
the dough hook to mix them well in a stand mixer or
commercial planetary mixer, usea paddle attachment initially to mixthe ingredients uniformly. Once
you have a homogeneous mass (the dough is sticky
and wet, and there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water), switch to a hook attachment.
COMMERCIAL PLANETARY MIXER
Weight: 12 qt bowl: 4-6 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 4 but do not exceed 6
20 qt bowl: 6-8 kg maximum; multiply this
recipe by at least 6 but do not exceed 8
Mix: pour the water into the mixer's bowl. Add
the bread flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar, and
yeast, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass,
about 3 min. Mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development, about 7 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
FORK MIXER
Weight: depends on the capacity of the mixer;
at least 8 kg is recommended; multiply this
recipe by at least 8
Mix: pour the water into the mixer's bowl. Add
the bread flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar, and
yeast, and mix on low speed to a shaggy mass,
about 5 min. Mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development, about 20 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take to
mix. Final mix time at higher speeds may vary from
machine to machine. Whatever the model and yield,
the goal is to achieve a good mix and nearly full
gluten development. Consider our suggested times
as guidelines only. Use the windowpane test to help
determine the dough's stage of gluten development.
DIVING ARM MIXER
Weight: 6 qt bowl: 3 kg maximum; multiply
this recipe by at least 2 but do not exceed 3
industrial-sized mixers: capacity willvary
Mix: pour the water into the mixer's bowl.
Add the bread flour, semolina flour, salt, sugar,
and yeast, and mix on low speed to a shaggy
mass, 2-3 min. Mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development, about 19 min.
Perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development.
Ifyou are mixing using the diving arm mixer, the
dough will be softer and easy to shape.
FOOD PROCESSOR
Weight: 12-16 cup work bowl: 1 kg
Robot Coupe, 2-3 qt work bowl: 1.2 kg;
industrial-sized food processors: capacity
will vary
Mix: place the bread flour, semolina flour, salt,
sugar, and yeast in the bowl. Turn the machine
on and pourin the water. Mix for 45 s. Perform
the windowpane test to assess gluten development. If the gluten is not fully developed, mix
for a few more seconds and check again.
MIX BENCH REST
6
DIVIDE
00
1 Follow the Machine Mixing Options above.
2 Transferthe dough to a generously oiled
tub.
3 Turn the dough over to fully coat with oil.
4 Shape the dough into a rectangle. Cover
well with plastic wrap.
5 Bench rest for 15 min.
6 Perform a four-edge fold.
7 Bench rest for 15 min, covered.
8 Generously oil the Detroit pans.
9 Divide into two 500 g pieces for 35 cm by
25 cm/14 in by 10 in pizzas or into three
330 g pieces for 25 cm by 20 cm /10 in by
8 in pizzas (see page 55).
When you divide the dough, try to keep the pieces
as rectangular as possible.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 167
7
PRESHAPE PROOF
10a 10b 11
10
168
Transfer the dough to the center of the
prepared pans seam side down, trying to
maintain the rectangular shape. Lightly
coat the surface of the dough with more
oil, and stretch the dough gently but
assertively without damaging it to fill the
pan evenly.
Make sure the corners are sharp and fill out the
corners of the pan.
For the large pizzas, we use full-sized Detroit pans
measuring 35 cm by 25 cm/14 in by 10 in. The small
pizzas are made in half-sized Detroit pans measuring
25 cm by 20 cm/10 in by 8 in. Our pans are made
from blue steel; for more on where to find these
pans, see Resources, page 3:377.
11 Proof the dough, covered, for 3 h at
21°C/70° F or 2/½ h at 27° C/80° F and
65% RH. Afterthe first hour, gently but
assertively stretch the dough out again to
fill the pan as evenly as possible.
12 Assemble and bake the pizza according
to the instructions on page 3:109.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ 1%
Water, 30-30.5°C/85-87° F 405 g 134 cups 70.43
INGREDIENT VARIATION
MODERNIST DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME
☑
Active: 15-20 min/
Inactive: 3% h
YIELD/SHAPE
two 35 cm by 25 cm/14 in by 10 in
pizzas or three 25 cm by 20 cm/
10 in by 8 in pizzas Dough relaxer options
see table below
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein* 490 g 32/3 cups 85.22 NET CONTENTS
Semolina flour 85 g 1/2½ cup 14.78 Ingredients Weight 2%
Fine salt 11.5 g 2 tsp 2 Bread flour 490 g 85.22
Sugar 8 g 2 tsp 1.39 Semolina flour 85 g 14.78
Instant dry yeast 5.2 g 2 tsp 0.9 Water 405 g 70.43
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, and other notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii.
*We recommend using Central Milling Organic Artisan Bakers Craft Bread Flour.
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
on page 166. See the table at rightfor instructions for adding the dough
relaxer. Dough Relaxer Options
These dough relaxer percentages are based on the net
weight of the flour. For tips on how to weigh out these
minuscule amounts, see page 1:328. For how to extract
kiwi juice and papaya juice, see page 1:328. Kiwi juice and
papaya juice performed best in our tests.
Salt 11.5 g
2
Sugar 8 g 1.39
Yeast 5.2 g 0.9
INGREDIENT % ADD TO...
Kiwi juice, fresh 0.08 the water
Papaya juice, fresh 0.03 the water
Bromelain, powdered 0.0005 the flour
Papain, powdered 0.01 the flour
Adolph's meat tenderizer 0.01 the flour
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 169
7
SUBMASTER RECIРЕ
ARGENTINEAN-STYLE “AL MOLDE"
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME
Active: 15-20 min /
Inactive: 2% h
YIELD/SHAPE
two 35 cm/14 in pizzas
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ
Water, 30-30.5°C/85-87° F 400 g 13/4 cups 67.8
All-purpose flour, 10%-
11.5% protein
490 g 32/3 cups 83.05 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 3
Cake flour 100 g 3/4 cup 16.95 All-purpose flour 490 g 83.05
Fine salt 12 g 21/8 tsp 2.03 Cake flour 100 g 16.95
Instant dry yeast 5.5 g 2 tsp 0.93 Water 400 g
67.8
Yield: ~1 kg Salt 12 g
2.03
For salt, flours, andother notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxii. Yeast 5.5 g 0.93
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
DIVIDE
pour the water into the mixer's bowl; add the allpurpose flour, cake flour, salt, and yeast; mix on low
speed to a shaggy mass; mix on medium speed to just
under full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten development (see page 30);
transfer to a lightly floured worktable
15 min; cover well
500 g
PRESHAPE ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well; lightly oil two
35 cm/14 in pizza pans
This versatile dough is easy to mix and shape. You can also use this dough as an
option for the base for the Burt Katz-inspired pizza on page 3:114.
If the ingredient quantities aren't large enough for the dough hook to mix them
well in a stand mixer or commercial planetary mixer, use a paddle attachment initially to mix the ingredients uniformly. Once you have a homogeneous mass (the
dough is sticky and wet, but there are no visible clumps or unincorporated water),
switch to a hook attachment.
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
SHAPE
PROOF
transfer the dough to the prepared pans seam side
down; coat the surface of the dough lightly with oil
and gently but assertively stretch the dough without
damaging it to try to fill the pan evenly
2 h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 11/½ h at 27°C/80°F
and 65% RH; halfway through proofing, gently but
assertively stretch the dough out again to fill the pan
as evenly as possible; for assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:126
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Detroit-Style Pizza
Dough on page 167.
The larger the yield, the longer the dough will take to mix. Final mixing times
at higher speeds may vary from machine to machine.Whatever the model and
yield, the goal is to achieve a good mix and to get to just under full gluten development. Consider our suggested times as guidelines only. Use the windowpane
test to help determine the dough's stage of gluten development.
170 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
OLD FORGE PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHАРE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 26
Water, 21°C/70°F 355 g 1/½ cups 59.17
Instant dry yeast 4g 1/½ tsp 0.67
Flour, 11.5%-14% protein* 600 g 41/½ cups 100
Fine salt 12 g 21/8 tsp 2
Sugar 18 g 1 Tbsp +11½ tsp 3
Extra-virgin olive oil 12 g 21½ tsp 2
Yield: ~1 kg
For salt, flours, andother notes, see page 1:xxii. For notes on substitutions, see page 1:xxіi.
*We recommend using General Mills All Trumps Bakers High Gluten Enriched Flour, Tony
Gemignani California Artisan Type 00 Flour Blend, Bouncer Premium High Gluten Flour,
Pillsbury Balancer Hi Gluten Flour, or Grain Craft Power High Gluten Flour.
A whole Old Forge Pizza is sometimes colloquially referred to as a "tray."
For more on suggested mixing times, see the Machine Mixing Options for Detroit-Style Pizza
Dough on page 167.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BULK
FERMENT
combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the flour, and mix on
low speed to a shaggy mass; autolyse for 30 min; add
the salt, and mix on low speed until it is fully incorporated; add the sugar and oil in a slow stream while the
mixer is running on low speed, and mix until it is fully
incorporated; mix on medium speed to medium gluten
development; transfer to a lightly oiled tub; perform a
four-edge fold
2/½ h at 21°C/70°F; cover well; perform 4 four-edge
folds (1 fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see page
51) or more until the dough reaches full gluten development; perform the windowpane test to assess gluten
development (see page 30); rest the dough, covered,
for 30 min after the final fold; lightly oil the pan(s)
DIVIDE 46 cm by 33 cm/ 18 in by 13 in: do not divide
33 cm by 23 cm /13 in by 9 in: 500 g
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 6h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/18 in by 13 in
pizza or two 33cm/by 23 cm/
13 in by 9 in pizzas
NET CONTENTS
Ingredients
Flour
Weight 1%
600 g 100
Water 355 g
59.17
Sugar 18 g 3
Salt 12 g
2
Fat 12 g 2
Yeast 4g 0.67
transfer the dough to the prepared pan(s) seam side
down, trying to keep the rectangular shape; coat the
surface of the dough with more oil; stretch the dough
gently and assertively without damaging it to try to fill
the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp; if
it is difficult to stretch the dough at this point, let the
dough rest for 30 min, covered, in the pan, and then
stretch it further to fill the pan
3 h at 21° C/70°F, covered, or 2 h at 27° C/80°F and
65% RH; cold-prooffor 16 h at 4° C / 39°F, covered,
and then 2 h at 27°C/ 80° F and 65% RH; halfway
through proofing, gently but assertively stretch the
dough out again to fill the pan as evenly as possible; for
assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:137
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 171
7
OUR VARIATION RECIPES
The variation tables on pages 172-191 will allow you to create a multitude
of doughs based on our master recipes. Follow the methods in the master recipes and be sure to refer back to the flour recommendations and
LEVAIN-RAISED VARIATIONS
practical tips given there when executing these variations. If you'd like
more information on each of these variation types, see the descriptions
in Our Variations on page 10О.
PIZZA STYLE LIQUID LEVAIN, MATURE SEE PAGE 1:304 FLOUR
Weight Volume % Weight Volume
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
160 g 3/4 cup 30.77 520 g 334 cups +2 Tbsp 100
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
180 g 1/½ cup 34.29 Cake flour
370 g 3 cups 70.48
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein
155 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 29.52
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
120 g 1/½ cup 37.5 320 g 21/3 cups 100
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
130 g 2/3 cup 24.3 535 g 4 cups 100
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
140 g 2/3 cup 26.42 530 g 32/3 cups 100
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
150 g 2/3 cup 27.27 550 g 334 cups 100
Focaccia Dough
see page 148
190 g 3/4 cup +2 47.5
Tbsp
400 g 23/4 cups 100
New York Square Pizza Dough
see page 152
90 g 1/3 cup +
1/½ Tbsp
25.35 355 g 2/½ cups 100
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
150 g 2/3 cup 30 Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein
415 g 3 cups 83
Semolina flour
85 g 1/2 cup 17
Notes
LEVAIN-RAISED THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Thin-Crust Pizza Dough on
page 110. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the yeast.
LEVAIN-RAISED BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough on page 114. Replace the yeast with levain. Increase the proofing
time to 4 h at 21° C/70°F.
LEVAIN-RAISED DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Deep-Dish Pizza Dough on
page 118. Replace the yeast with levain.
LEVAIN-RAISED NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Neapolitan Pizza Dough
with Poolish on page 128. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the
yeast, and add the malt powder with the flour.
LEVAIN-RAISED NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for New York Pizza Dough on
page 132. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the yeast.
LEVAIN-RAISED ARTISAN PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Artisan Pizza Dough on
page 142. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the yeast.
LEVAIN-RAISED FOCACCIA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Focaccia Dough on page
148. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the yeast.
LEVAIN-RAISED NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for New York Square Pizza
Dough on page 152. Replace the poolish with levain. Omit the yeast.
LEVAIN-RAISED DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
on page 166. Replace the yeast with levain.
172 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
WATER, 21°C/70°F FINE SALT FAT OTHER
Weight Volume % Weight Volume 1% Weight Volume Weight Volume 12
345 g 11/2 cups 66.35 13 g 214 tsp +1 tsp 2.5 n/a Fine-ground cornmeal
55 g 1/½ cup 10.58
220 g 1 cup 41.9 12.3 g 214 tsp 2.34 Extra-virgin olive oil
60 g 1½ cup
n/a
11.42
165 g 3/4 cup 51.56 8 g 11/½ tsp 2.5 Lard, softened
18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74
Butter, softened
18 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp 4.74
Malted barley syrup
7g 1 tsp 2.19
Fine-ground cornmeal
40 g 13 cup 12.5
330 g 17/½ cups 61.68 13.4 g 21/4 tsp +1 tsp 2.5 n/a Diastatic malt powder
1.3 g 14 tsp 0.24
345 g 1/½ cups 65.09 14.5 g 2/2 tsp 2.74 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/4 tsp 3.77
Diastatic malt powder
15 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp 2.83
375 g 12/3 cups 68.18 12.5 g 214 tsp 2.27 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 3.64
Diastatic malt powder
13 g 1Tbsp +14 tsp 2.36
335 g 1/½ cups 83.75 10 g 13/4 tsp 2.5 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1Tbsp + 1/4 tsp 5
Malted barley syrup
5g 3/4 tsp 1.25
255 g 1 cup +
2 Tbsp
71.83 7.9 g 114 tsp +18 tsp 2.23 Extra-virgin olive oil
15 g 1 Tbsp +14 tsp 4.23
n/a
330 g 1/½ cups 66 11.5 g 2 tsp 2.3 n/a Sugar
8g 2 tsp 1.6
SECOND-CHANCE LEVAIN VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE AMOUNT OF INSTANT DRY YEAST TO ADD AMOUNT OF INACTIVE LEVAIN TO ADD
Weight Volume 23 Weight Volume 96
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough see page 110 4.8 g 13/4 tsp 0.92 160 g 3/4 cup 30.77
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough see page 114 3g 18 tsp 0.57 180 g 3/4 cup 34.29
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough see page 118 4.8 g 13/4 tsp 1.5 120 g /½ cup 37.5
Neapolitan Pizza Dough see page 124 2.3 g 3/4 tsp + 8 tsp 0.43 130 g 2/3 cup 24.3
New York Pizza Dough see page 132 2.9 g 1 tsp 0.55 140 g 2/3 cup 26.42
Artisan Pizza Dough see page 142 2.68 g 1 tsp 0.49 150 g 2/3 cup 27.27
Focaccia Dough see page 148 2.5 g 3/4 tsp + 1/8 tsp 0.63 190 g 3/4 cup +2 Tbsp 47.5
New York Square Pizza Dough see page 152 2.06 g 3/4 tsp 0.58 90 g 1/3 cup +11/½ Tbsp 25.35
High-Hydration al Taglio Pizza Dough see page 158 3.7 g 11/4 tsp + 8 tsp 0.59 220 g 1 cup 34.92
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough see page 166 5.2 g 2 tsp 1.04 150 g 2/3 cup 30
Notes
Make the recipes for the levain versions above but replace the levain with inactive levain (see page 1:310). The amount of yeast listed in the table above
should be dissolved in the water portion of the recipe. Add the inactive levain to the water after dissolving the yeast.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 173
7
COMPLEAT WHEAT VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE PREFERMENT WATER, 21°C/70°F INSTANT DRY YEAST
Weight Volume Weight Volume Weight Volume 區
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
For the Poolish 395 g 13/4 cups 84.95 4.2 g 11/½ tsp 0.9
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% 50 g 1/3 cup 100
protein
Water 50 g 3 Tbsp +11/2 tsp 100
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g 0.1
Brazilian Thin-Crust
Pizza Dough
see page 114
n/a 385 g 12/3 cupsps 74.76 2.5 g 1 tsp 0.49
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
n/a 255 g 1 cup+2 Tbsp 80.95 2.6 g 1 tsp 0.80.83
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
n/a 380 g 12/3 cups 969.72 0.22 g 1 tsp 0.04
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
For the Poolish 355 g 1/2 cups 80.68 2..3 g
High-gluten bread
flour, 13.5%-15% protein
50 g 1/3 cup 100
3/4 tsp +
1/8 tsp
0.52
Water 50 g 3 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 100
Instant dry yeast 0.05 g * 0.1
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
For the Poolish 400 g 13/4 cups 85.11 2.2 g 3/4 tsp 0.47
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% 65g 1/½ cup 100
protein
Water 65 g 14 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
0.11
Compleat wheat thin-crust pizza
174 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
FLOUR FINE SALT FAT OTHER BRAN AND GERM MIXTURE
Weight Volume % Weight Volume Weight Volume Weight Volume Weight Volume 1%
465 g 3/½ cups 100 11g 2 tsp 2.37 n/a Fine-ground cornmeal Wheat bran
50 g 13 cup +1
Tbsp
10.75 65 g 1 cup 13.98
Wheat germ
10 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.15
Water
75 g 3 cup 16.13
Cake flour 11 g 2 tsp 2.14 Extra-virgin olive oil n/a Wheat bran
310 g 2/½ cups 60.19 50 g 14 cup 9.71 70 g 174 cups 13.59
Bread flour Wheat germ
205 g 11/½ cups 39.81 15 g 2 Tbsp 2.91
Water
85 g 1/3 cup 16.5
315 g 213 cups 100 7 g 1/4 tsp 2.22 Lard, softened Malted barley syrup Wheat bran
15 g 1 Tbsp 4.76
Butter, softened
6g 1tsp
Fine-ground cornmeal
1.9 45 g 3/4 cup 14.29
Wheat germ
15 g 1 Tbsp 4.76 35 g 14 cup 11.11 10 g 1 Tbsp +1 tsp 3.17
Diastatic malt powder Water
7g 134 tsp 2.22 55 g 14 cup 17.46
545 g 4 cups 100 10.9 g 2 tsp 2 n/a Adolph's meat tenderizer Wheat bran
0.05 g
*
0.01 85 g 17/½ cups 15.6
Wheat germ
15 g 2 Tbsp 2.75
Water
75 g 1/3 cup 13.76
440 g 3 cups 100 12 g 28 tsp 2.73 Extra-virgin olive oil
15 g 1 Tbsp +
174 tsp
Diastatic malt powder Wheat bran
3.41 12 g 1 Tbsp 2.73 60 g 1 cup 13.64
Wheat germ
10 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.27
Water
70 g 1/3 cup 15.91
470 g 31/2 cups 100 10.7 g 2 tsp 2.28 Extra-virgin olive oil
18 g 1Tbsp + 1 tsp
Diastatic malt powder Wheat bran
3.83 11 g 234 tsp 2.34 65 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 13.83
Wheat germ
15 g 2 Tbsp 3.19
Water
80 g 1/3 cup
CONTINUED ON PAGE 176
17.02
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 175
7
COMPLEAT WHEAT VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE PREFERMENT WATER, 21°C/70°F INSTANT DRY YEAST
Weight Volume 1% Weight Volume Weight Volume %
Focaccia Dough
see page 148
For the Poolish 380 g 12/3 cups 105.56 1.1 g
Bread flour, 11.5%-12% 60 g 1/2 cup 100
1/4 tsp +
8 tsp
0.31
protein
Water 60 g 14 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
0.1
Liquid levain, mature
see page 1:304
60 g 4 cup 16.67
New York Square
Pizza Dough
see page 152
For the Poolish 220 g 1 cup 72.13 1.7 g
High-gluten bread 35 g 14 cup 100
1/2 tsp +
18 tsp
0.56
flour, 13.5%–15%protein
Water 35 g 2 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 100
Instant dry yeast 0.04 g 0.11
High-Hydration al Taglio
Pizza Dough
see page 158
Liquid levain, mature 210 g 1 cup 41.58 510 g 214 cups 100.99 3.7 g
see page 1:304
114 tsp + 0.73
1/8 tsp
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
n/a
*Refer to the specific master recipe when calculating this volume.
425 g 134 cups +12 85.86 4.4 g 1½ tsp + 0.89
Tbsp 1/8 tsp
1 Toast the bran and germ in an even layer in
a still oven at 175°C/350°F until aromatic,
5-7 min. Transfer to a bowl and cool completely. Add the specified amount of water;
and soak for at least 10 min before mixing
into the dough.
3 Place the dough in a lightly oiled tub, and
perform a four-edge fold.
5
4
2 Follow the instructions for mixing the specific type of dough based on its master
recipe, but mix it only to medium gluten
development (see page 30). Then add the
toasted and soaked bran and germ, and
mix on low speed until just incorporated.
Bulk fermentthe dough for 2½ h, covered,
at 21° C/70°F. Perform 4 four-edge folds (1
fold every 30 min after the first 30 min; see
page 51) or more until the dough reaches
full gluten development. Perform the windowpane test to assess full gluten development (see page 30). Rest the dough,
covered, for 30 min after the final fold.
Follow the remaining instructions for the
master recipe of the pizza style you are
making.
БАЗА ПРЕМИУ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
доступ ко всей базе 400р
FLOUR FINE SALT FAT OTHER BRAN AND GERM MIXTURE
Weight Volume 1%1 Weight Volume % Weight Volume % Weight Volume б9 Weight Volume %
360 g 22/3 cups 100 9g 11/½ tsp 2.5 Extra-virgin olive oil
18 g 1Tbsp + 1 tsp 5
Malted barley syrup
4.5 g /½ tsp +a tsp 1.25
Wheat bran
50 g 3/4 cup 13.89
Wheat germ
10 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.78
Water
60 g 14 cup 16.67
305 g 2 cups +
2 Tbsp
100 6.8 g 114 tsp 2.23 Extra-virgin olive oil n/a Wheat bran
15 g 1 Tbsp +
1/4 tsp
4.92 50 g 3/4 cup
+ 2 Tbsp
16.39
Wheat germ
8 g 1 Tbsp 2.62
Water
60 g 14 cup 19.67
505 g 334 cups 100 15.2 g 23/4 tsp 3.01 Extra-virgin olive oil
24 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 4.75
Diastatic malt powder
1.5 g 14 tsp + 1/s tsp 0.24
Wheat bran
85 g 1/½ cups 16.83
Wheat germ
15 g 2 Tbsp 2.97
Water
100 g 13 cup +1 Tbsp 19.8
+2 tsp
Bread flour 10 g 13/4 tsp 2.02 n/a Sugar Wheat bran
425 g 3 cups +2
Tbsp
85.86 7g 134 tsp 1.41
Semolina flour
70 g 13 cup +13/½ 14.14
Tbsp
55 g 1 cup
Wheat germ
10 g
Water
1 Tbsp +1 tsp 2.02
11.11
65 g 14 cup 13.13
Compleat wheat New York pizza Compleat wheat Detroit-style pizza Compleat wheat high-hydration
al taglio pizza
Compleat wheat Neapolitan pizza Compleat wheat deep-dish pizza Compleat wheat artisan pizza
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 177
7
GRAIN, NUT, OR SEED VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE PREFERMENT
Weight Volume
WATER, 21°C /70°F
Weight %
INSTANT DRY YEAST
Volume Weight Volume 1%
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
For the Poolish 335 g 11/½ cups 68.37 4.3 g 17/½ tsp 0.88
Bread flour, 50 g 3 cup 100
11.5%-12% protein
Water 50 g 3 Tbsp +11/½ tsp 100
Instant dry yeast 0.05 g 0.1
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
n/a 335 g 1/½ cups 62.04 0.21 g /8 tsp 0.04
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
Forthe Poolish 320 g 11/3 cups 65.98 2.6 g 1 tsp 0.54
Bread flour, 55 g 1/3 cup + 100
11.5%–12% protein 1 Tbsp
Water 55 g 1/4 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.06 g
0.11
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
For the Poolish 335 g 11/½ cups 67.68 2.3 g
Bread flour. 65 g 1/½ cup 100
34 tsp +
18 tsp
0.46
11.5%-12% protein
Water 65 g 14 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
0.11
Focaccia Dough
see page 148
For the Poolish 335 g
Bread flour, 65 g 1/2 cup 100
114 cups + 83.75
3 Tbsp
1.2 g 1/2 tsp 0.3
11.5%-12% protein
Water 65 g 1/4 cup 100
Instant dry yeast 0.07 g
0.11
Liquid levain,
mature
see page 1:304
60 g 14 cup 15
New York Square
Pizza Dough
see page 152
For the Poolish 230 g 1 cup 71.88 1.7 g 1/2 tsp +
0.53
High-gluten bread 35 g 14 cup 100 tsp
flour, 13.5%-15%
protein
Water
Instant dry yeast
35 g
0.04 g
2 Tbsp +11/½ tsp 100
0.11
High-Hydration al Taglio
Pizza Dough
see page 158
Liquid levain, 220 g 1 cup 38.26 450 g 2 cups 78.26 3.5 g 114 tsp 0.61
mature
see page 1:304
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
n/a 370 g 12/3 cups 70.48 4.7 g 134 tsp 0.9
*Referto the specific master recipewhen calculating this volume.
**The volume measurements of the inclusions will vary depending on the ingredients used.
1 Follow the instructions for mixing the specific type of dough based on its master
recipe, but mix it only to medium gluten
development (see page 30). Then add the
grain, nut, or seed inclusions, and mix on
low speed until just incorporated.
2 Place the dough in a lightly oiled tub, and
perform a four-edge fold.
3 Bulk ferment the dough for 21/½ h, covered,
at 21°C/70° F. Perform 4 four-edge folds
(I fold every 30 min after the first 30 min;
see page 51) or more until the dough
reaches full gluten development. Perform
the windowpane test to assess full gluten
development (see page 30). Rest the
dough, covered, for 30 min after the
final fold.
4 Follow the remaining instructions for the
master recipe of the pizza style you are
making.
178 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
FLOUR FINE SALT FAT
Weight Volume % Weight Volume 16 Weight Volume 1%
490 g 32/3 cups 100 12 g 21/8 tsp 2.45 n/a
OTHER
Weight Volume
GRAIN, NUT, OR SEED
Weight Volume
Fine-ground cornmeal 110 g 22.45
50 g 13 cup +
1 Tbsp
10.2
540 g 4 cups 100 10.8 g 2 tsp 2 n/a Meat tenderizer
0.05 g*
110 g 20.37
0.01
485 g 3/½ cups 100 13.5 g 21/½ tsp 2.78 Extra-virgin olive oil
18g 1 Tbsp + 3.71
1 tsp
Diastatic malt powder
14g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp
100 g
** 20.62
2.89
495 g 32/3 cups 100 11 g 2 tsp 2.22 Extra-virgin olive oil
18g 1 Tbsp + 3.64
1 tsp
Diastatic malt powder
12g 1 Tbsp
110 g
** 22.22
2.42
400 g 3 cups 100 10 g 134 tsp 2.5 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1 Tbsp + 5
Malted barley syrup
5g 3/4 tsp
100 g
** 25
1.25
11/4 tsp
320 g 214 cups 100 7.2 g 114 tsp 2.25 Extra-virgin olive oil n/a 75 g 23.44
15 g 1 Tbsp + 4.69
14 tsp
575 g 414 cups 100 17 g 1 Tbsp 2.96 Extra-virgin olive oil
27 g 2 Tbsp 4.7
Diastatic malt powder
1.5 g 1/4 tsp +1a tsp
130 g
** 22.61
0.24
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein 10.5 g 17/8 tsp 2 n/a Sugar 105 g 20
7g 134 tsp 450 1.33 g 33 cups 85.71
Semolina flour
75 g 1/3cup +2 14.29
Tbsp
Notes
You can soak, sprout, or cook your grains
into a porridge or grain puree (see pages
3:342-3:349). If the nuts are small, leave
them whole and toast them. If they are large,
such as walnuts, pecans, or cashews, chop
them coarsely, and then toast.
• Ifyou make a hot preparation such as a porridge or grain puree, or if you toast the inclusion, make sure it cools down before you mix
it into the dough.
• You may want to cook grains with salt
because an unseasoned inclusion can dilute
the flavor of the crust. Add 1% salt to the
grains (based on the grain amount, not the
water or flour amount).
You can also use the amounts listed on page
1:331 to create pizza crusts with fruit, vegetable, meat, or cheese inclusions.
For thin-crust pizzas, make sure to use inclusions that are not too big. Large chunks,
pieces, or cubes will limit your ability to
stretch the dough out thinly. The dimensions
of the inclusions should be a maximum of
about 3 mm/ in.
For the Neapolitan pizza, you can use grano
arso (burnt flour) as the inclusion in the
dough to add another level of toasted flavor
to the finished pizza.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 179
7
COUNTRY-STYLE VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE FLOUR WEIGHT IN
MASTER RECIPE (100%)
ALL-PURPOSE FLOUR,
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 11о
540 g
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
615 g
BREAD FLOUR, OR
A MIX (~70%)
380 g (234 cups)
Cake flour
WHOLE WHEAT
FLOUR (~15%)
LIGHT, MEDIUM,
OR DARK RYE
80 g (2/s cup)
FLOUR (~15%)
80 g (34 cup)
90 g (34 cup) 90 g (34 cup +2 Tbsp)
370 g (3 cups)
Bread flour, 11.5%–12% protein
65 g (/½ cup)
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
380 g 270 g (2 cups) 55 g (3 cup +11½
Tbsp)
55 g (1/½ cup)
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
610 g 430 g (3 cups + 2 Tbsp) 90 g (2/3 cup) 90 g (34 cup + 2 Tbsp)
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
530 g 370 g (23/4 cups) 80 g (2/½ cup) 80 g (34 cup)
Artisan Pizza Dough 550 g 380 g (23/4 cups) 85 g (2/3 cup) 85 g (34 cup)
see page 142
Focaccia Dough 400 g
280 g (2 cups) 60 g (1/½ cup) 60 g (1/½ cup + 11/2 Tbsp)
see page 148
New York Square Pizza Dough
see page 152
395 g 275 g (2 cups) 60 g (½ cup) 60 g (1/½ cup + 1 Tbsp)
High-Hydration al Taglio
Pizza Dough
630 g 410 g (3 cups) 110 g (34 cup + 2 Tbsp) 110 g (1 cup)
see page 158
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
575 g Bread flour, 11.5%-12% protein
340 g (2/½ cups)
75 g (1/½ cup +
1/2 Tbsp)
75 g (34 cup)
Semolina flour
85 g (1½ cup)
Notes
You will be substituting 30 ofthe total
weight of the flour (first column) for 15
whole wheat flour and 15 rye flour to create a country-style pizza dough.
Follow the instructions for the master recipе
of the pizza style you are making. The whole
wheat flour and rye flour will be mixed into
the dough along with the all-purpose or
bread flour.
You can replace the whole wheat and rye
flours with 30% whole wheat flour if desired.
Be sure to include the cornmeal in addition
to the flours in the Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
on page 110 and the Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
on page 118.
You can replace the whole wheat and rye
flours with 30 masa harina flour in the
Neapolitan Pizza Dough (see page 124)
if desired.
180
Country-style Detroit-style pizza
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
ANCIENT GRAIN VARIATIONS ANCIENT GRAIN MIX TOTALS 40 OF FLOUR
PIZZA STYLE FLOUR WEIGHT ALL-PURPOSE FLOUR, WHOLE SPELT EINKORN
IN MASTER BREAD FLOUR, OR FLOUR (15%) FLOUR (15)
EMMER FLOUR
(10)
RECIPE (100) A MIX (60%)
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
540 g 325 g (21/4 cups + 2 Tbsp) 80 g (3½ cup) 80 g (34 cup)
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
615 g 370 g (23/4 cups) 90 g (3/4 cup)
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
380 g 230 g (13/4 cups) 55 g (/½ cup(
KHORASAN
FLOUR (15%)
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
610 g 370 g (23/4 cups) 90 g (½ cup) 90 g (34 cup)
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
530 g 320 g (2/3 cups) 75 g (2/3 cup) 75 g (2/3 cup)
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
550 g 335 g (21/½ cups) 80 g (34 cup) 80 g (3/4 cup)
KHORASAN BUCKWHEAT
FLOUR (15%) FLOUR (15%)
90 g (34 cup)
55 g (1/½ cup)
WHOLE SPELT
FLOUR (15%)
55 g (1½ cup)
65 g (½ cup(
40 g (/3cup)
EMMER FLOUR
(10)
60 g (/½ cup)
60 g (1½ cup)
55 g (½ cup)
DARK RYE
FLOUR (10%)
Focaccia Dough
see page 148
400 g 240 g (134 cups) 60 g (/½ cup) 60 g (1/½ cup) 40 g (13 cup)
New York Square Pizza Dough
see page 152
395 g 235 g (13/4 cups) 60 g (1/½ cup +
1 Tbsp)
60 g (2 cup +
1 Tbsp)
40 g (13 cup)
High-Hydration al Taglio
Pizza Dough
630 g 375 g (234 cups) 95 g (34 cup) 95 g (34 cup( 65 g (7½ cup)
see page 158
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
see page 166
575 g 345 g (21/2 cups) 85 g (34 cup) 85 g (34 cup) 60 g (2/3 cup)
Notes
You will be substituting 40 of the total
weight of the flour (first column) for a 40
mix of ancient grain flours to create an
ancient grain dough for any style of pizza
dough.
You can use any type of ancient grain flours
you like; these are simply the ones we liked
for these types of doughs. We did a mix of
15%, 15%, and 10, but you can shift those
percentages as long as they total 40. Using
more ancient grain flour than this will make
the dough very weak and hard to work with.
It'll also bake with a lower volume.
If you include flours that are gluten-free, we
recommend that you add up to 5 vital
wheat gluten to the dough to strengthen it.
Add it to the flour before mixing the dough.
You can also add 1.4 g (1/½ tsp) ascorbic acid
with the flour to strengthen these doughs,
especially those with hydrations above 70%.
Follow the instructions for the master recipe
of the pizza style you are making. The ancient
grain flours will be mixed into the dough
along with the all-purpose or bread flour.
Be sure to include the cornmeal in addition
to the flour in the Thin-Crust Pizza Dough on
page 110 and the Deep-Dish Pizza Dough on
page 118.
Our master Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough
uses a combination of cake flour and bread
flour. In our ancient grain variation, we omit
the cake flour and use mainly bread flour
because you need a stronger flour to counteract the adverse effects the ancient grain
flours have on the dough (see page 1:325).
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
Ancient grain NewYork pizza
181
7
NO-KNEAD VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE FLOUR WATER, 21°C/70°F
Weight Volume Weight Volume 2%
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough 595 g 44 cups +2 Tbsp 100 425 g 134 cups +11/½ Tbsp 71.43
see page 110
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
615 g 4/2 cups 100 310 g 113 cups 50.41
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough
see page 118
380 g 234 cups 100 225 g 1 cup 59.21
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
610 g 41/2 cups 100 380 g 12/3 cups 62.3
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
590 g 4 cups 100 410 g 13/4 cups 69.49
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page142
*Refer to the specific master recipe when calculating this volume.
182
625 g 4/3 cups 100 450 g 2 cups 72
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
No-knead artisan pizza
FINE SALT INSTANT DRY YEAST FAT OTHER
Weight Volume Weight Volume % Weight Volume Weight Volume
13 g 21/4 tsp + 1/8 tsp 2.18 1.6 g 1/½ tsp + 8 tsp 0.27 n/a Fine-ground cornmeal
55 g 1/½ cup 9.24
12.3 g 21/4 tsp 2 1.6 g 1/2 tsp + % tsp 0.26 Extra-virgin olive oil
60 g 14 cup +1 tsp
n/a
9.76
8g 114 tsp + 1/8 tsp 2.11 1g 14 tsp + 18 tsp 0.26 Lard, softened Fine-ground cornmeal
18 g 1 Tbsp +34 tsp 4.74 40 g 1/3 cup 10.53
Butter, softened Malted barley syrup
18 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 4.74 7g 1 tsp 1.84
Diastatic malt powder
8g 2 tsp 2.11
12.15 g 28 tsp 1.99 0.22 g 18 tsp 0.04
14.5 g 21/2 tsp 2.46 1.6 g 1/2 tsp + 8 tsp 0.28 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1 Tbsp +11/4 tsp 3.39
12.5 g 214 tsp 2 1.7 g 1/½ tsp +1% tsp 0.27 Extra-virgin olive oil
20 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 3.2
Meat tenderizer
0.05 g 0.01
Diastatic malt powder
15g 1 Tbsp +34 2.54
tsp
Diastatic malt powder
13 g 1 Tbsp +14 2.08
tsp
1 Combine all the ingredients in a bowl, and
mix by hand to a homogeneous mass.
Transfer to a lightly oiled tub, and cover.
2 Bulk ferment for 12-18 h at 21°C/70°F.
3 Divide and preshape the dough as
instructed in the master recipe you are
making.
4 Proof for 3-4 h at 21°C/70°F, covered. If
you are making New York pizza dough,
proof for 4/2-51/½ h at 21° C /70° F, covered.
5 Proceed with the shaping and baking
instructions in the master recipe you are
making.
Notes
After preshaping, you can also cold-proof
this dough at 4°C/39° F for 1-2 d for even
better baking results. If you cold-proof the
dough, remove it from refrigeration 11/2-2 h
before shaping so it warms up and is easier
to stretch out.
Our master Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough
uses a combination of cake flour and bread
flour. In our no-knead variation, we use just
bread flour in order to strengthen the dough
since it is mixed only to a homogeneous
mass.
No-knead Neapolitan pizza
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
No-knead New York pizza
183
7
YOUR DAILY PIZZA VARIATIONS
PIZZA STYLE FLOUR WATER, 21°C /70°F FINE SALT
Weight Volume Weight Volume 圖 Weight Volume 16
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 110
1.97 kg 131/2 cups 100 1.41 kg 6 cups + 2 Tbsp 71.57 43 g 2 Tbsp +134 2.18
tsp
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
see page 114
2.21 kg 1613 cups 100 1.12 kg 434 cups +2 Tbsp 50.68 45 g 2 Tbsp +2 2.04
tsp
Neapolitan Pizza Dough
see page 124
2.1 kg 151/2 cups 100 1.38 kg 6 cups 65.71 46 g 2 Tbsp + 214 2.19
tsp
New York Pizza Dough
see page 132
4.2 kg 29 cups 100 2.9 kg 122/3 cups 69.05 104 g 3 сир +2/½ 2.48
tsp
Artisan Pizza Dough
see page 142
2.06 kg 144 cups 100 1.48 kg 6/½ cups 71.84 41 g 2 Tbsp +114 1.99
tsp
1
2
Combine the flour, water, salt, yeast, fat (if
applicable), and other ingredients in the
mixer's bowl. Mix on low speed with a
paddle or hook attachment to a homogeneous mass, 2-3 min. Transfer to a lightly
oiled tub, and cover.
Bulk ferment for 1 h at 21°C/70° F. Take the
cover off, and put a piece of plastic wrap
directly on the surface of the dough to
cover it completely. Place in refrigeration
for at least 23 h before your first bake.
3 Divide the dough as instructed in the master recipe you are making.
5
4 Proceed with the preshaping instructions (if
applicable) in the master recipe you are
making.
Proof for 41/2-51/½ h at 21° C/70°F, covered.
If you are making Neapolitan pizza dough,
proof for 3-4 h at 21° C/70° F, covered.
Proceed with the shaping and baking
instructions in the master recipe you are
making.
Your daily thin-crust pizza
184 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
INSTANT DRY YEAST FAT OTHER
Weight Volume Weight Volume Weight Volume
5.3 g 2 tsp 0.27 n/a Fine-ground cornmeal
181 g 11/2 cups 9.19
Ascorbic acid
4.3 g 11/4 tsp 0.22
6g 214 tsp 0.27 Extra-virgin olive oil Ascorbic acid
215 g 3/4 cup +3
Tbsp
9.73 5g 11/½ tsp 0.23
5.7 g 2 tsp 0.27 n/a Polydextrose Your daily New York pizza
21g 1 Tbsp + 21/4 tsp 1
Ascorbic acid
4.7 g 11/4 tsp +/ tsp 0.22
11.4 g 2Tbsp +18 0.27 Extra-virgin olive oil Diastatic malt powder
tsp 140 g 2/3 cup 3.33 106 g 1/½ cup +21/2 tsp 2.52
Ascorbic acid
9.2 g 23/4 tsp 0.22
5.6 g 2 tsp 0.27 Extra-virgin olive oil
64 g 14 cup 3.11
Diastatic malt powder
43 g 3 Tbsp + 134 tsp 2.09
Ascorbic acid
4.5 g 114 tsp +1 tsp 0.22
Your daily artisan pizza
Notes
The yields for these doughs assume making one pizza per day for up to
10 days. The thin-crust pizza dough and Neapolitan pizza dough can
last up to 14 days.
Our master Brazilian thin-crust pizza dough uses a combination of
cake flour and bread flour. In the Your Daily Pizza variation, we use
only bread flour because you needa stronger flour that will hold up to
being refrigerated for several days.
The New York pizza dough has a rather large yield. To make enough
dough for the smallest New York pizza (400 g) for a pizza every day
for 10 days, you will need at least 4 kg of dough. This dough amount
gives you the option of making slightly larger or different-sized pizzas
for 10 days. If you want to make a specific size every day and this
yield is not the exact amount you need, you can refer to the recipe
conversion factor (RCF) section on page 21 to help calculate the
amount you need.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
Your daily Neapolitan pizza
185
7
FLAVOR VARIATIONS
We have developed a myriad of puree possibilities to work with our master pizza doughs. The purees in the table below are categorized by their
PUREE TYPE % THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH DEEP-DISH PIZZA
SEE PAGE 110
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
culinary usage, so ingredients that are similar in consistency and amount
of water are grouped together. We included some additional suggestions
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 118 DOUGH SEE PAGE 124
NEW YORK PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 132
PIZZA DOUGH SEE PAGE 114
Thick vegetable puree: roasted red pepper puree, carrot puree, huitlacoche puree, tomato puree, roasted zucchini puree, sautéed onion puree,
kimchi puree, any pepper (including hot peppers) puree, turnip puree, parsnip puree, celery root puree, cauliflower puree
Roasted red 10.92 67 g (14 cup) 42 g (21/½ Tbsp) 65 g (14 cup) 64 g (14 cup)
pepper puree
Carrot puree* 50.41 310 g (11/4 cups) 192 g (34 cup) 300 g (114 cups) 297 g (11/4 cups)
Huitlacoche puree* 55.46 341 g (13 cups) 211 g (34 cup +2 Tbsp) 330 g (11/3 cups) 327 g (11/3 cups)
Tomato puree* 47.06 238 g (1 cup) tomato water 147 g (2/3 cup) tomato
water
230 g (1 cup) tomato water 228 g (1 cup) tomato water
52 g (3 Tbsp) tomato paste 32 g (2 Tbsp) tomato
paste
50 g (3 Tbsp) tomato paste 50 g (3 Tbsp) tomato paste
Roasted zucchini puree* 57.58 354 g (11/½ cups +1 Tbsp) 219 g (1 cup) 343 g (11/½ cups) 340 g (1/2 cups)
Sautéed onion puree* 57.58 354 g (11/2 cups +1 Tbsp) 219 g (1 cup) 343 g (11/½ cups) 340 g (11/½ cups)
Kimchi puree* 65.25 401 g (12/3 cups) 248 g (1 cup) 388 g (1/½ cups) 385 g (1½ cups)
Poblano pepper puree* 67.57 416 g (134 cups +1 Tbsp) 257 g (1 cup +2 Tbsp) 402 g (134 cups) 399 g (13/4 cups)
Nut or seed paste: tahini, chestnut puree, sunflower seed butter, black sesame seed paste, nut butter (cashew, pecan, hazelnut),
unsweetened nut paste (pistachio)
Tahini** 15.97 98 g (1/½ cup) 61 g (3 cup) 95 g (1/½ cup) 94 g (½ cup)
Chestnut puree* 50.41 310 g (21½ cups) 192 g (11/2 cups) 300 g (2½ cups) 297 g (23 cups +1 Tbsp)
Sunflower seed butter*** 21.05 130 g (1/½ cup) 80 g (13 cup) 125 g (/½ cup)
Legume puree: refried black beans, edamame puree, tofu puree, hummus, unsweetened peanut butter
Refried black beans 16.81 103 g (34 cup) 64 g (1/2 cup) 100 g (34 cup)
Edamame puree**** 21.05 130 g (/½ cup) 80 g (3 cup) 125 g (½ cup)
124 g (1/½ cup)
99 g (34 cup)
124 g (½ cup)
Silken tofu puree* 60 369 g (13/4 cups) 228 g (1 cup) 357 g (12/3 cups) 354 g (12/3 cups)
Thick store-bought sauce: mole sauce puree, romesco sauce puree, marinara sauce puree, salsa, curries, pasta sauce
Mole sauce puree 13.45 83 g (1/3 cup) 51 g (14 cup) 80 g (3 cup) 79 g (13 cup)
Romesco sauce puree* 65.25 401 g (17/½ cups) 248 g (1 cup) 388 g (1½ cups) 385 g (1/2 cups)
Marinara sauce puree* 65.25 401 g (11/2 cups) 248 g (1 cup) 388 g (1/½ cups) 385 g (11/2 cups)
Starchy puree: salsify puree, sunchoke puree, corn puree, potato puree, taro root puree, poi puree, sweet potato puree
Salsify puree* 50.41 310 g (114 cups) 192 g (34 cup) 300 g (114 cups) 297 g (114 cups)
Sunchoke puree* 55.46 341 g (1/½ cups) 211 g (1 cup) 330 g (1½ cups) 327 g (1/½ cups)
Grilled corn puree* 50 308 g (173 cups) 190 g (3/4 cup) 298 g (114 cups) 295 g (11/4 cups)
Loose puree: hearts of palm puree, artichoke puree, olive puree, mushroom puree, black garlic puree, herb puree, squid ink puree
Hearts of palm puree* 50.41 310 g (114 cups) 192 g (34 cup) 300 g (1½ cups) 297 g (114 cups)
Artichoke puree* 60 369 g (14 cups) 228 g (1 cup) 357 g (12/s cups) 354 g (12/3 cups)
Kalamata olive puree* 60 369 g (112 cups) 228 g (1 cup) 357 g (11/2 cups) 354 g (1/2 cups)
Green olive puree* 57.58 354 g (13 cups) 219 g (34 cup +2 Tbsp) 343 g (1/3 cups) 340 g (113 cups)
Black garlic puree* 68.92 424 g (134 cups +1 Tbsp) 262 g (1 cup + 2 Tbsp) 410 g (134 cups) 407 g (134 cups)
Herb puree* 60 369 g (1/½ cups) 228 g (1 cup) 357 g (1/2 cups) 354 g (1½ cups)
Squid ink puree* 65.25 401 g (13/4 cups) 248 g (1 cup) 388 g (12/3 cups) 385 g (12/3 cups)
186 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
if you want to use these amounts as guidelines with other purees. The
instructions for making the purees follow the table. Unless otherwise
ARTISAN PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 142
indicated, add the puree amount with the water portion of the dough.
Freeze any leftover puree for future use.
FOCACCIA DOUGH
SEE PAGE 148
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 152
HIGH-HYDRATION
AL TAGLIO PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 158
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 166
33 g (2 Tbsp) tomato paste
68 g (14 cup)
315 g (1½ cups)
347 g (113 cups)
242 g (1 cup + 2 tsp) tomato
water
53 g (3 Tbsp) tomato paste
54 g (3 Tbsp +1 tsp)
250 g (1 cup)
275 g (1 cup +2 Tbsp)
191 g (34 cup + 1 Tbsp)
tomato water
42 g (21/½ Tbsp) tomato
paste
43 g (2 Tbsp +21/4 tsp)
200 g (34 cup +11/½ Tbsp)
220 g (34 cup +2/½ Tbsp)
152 g (2/½ cup) tomato water
81 g (14 cup +1 Tbsp)
373 g (1/½ cups)
410 g (12/3 cups)
286 g (114 cup) tomato
63 g (14 cup)
290 g (11/4 cups)
319 g (113 cups)
222 g (1 cup) tomato water
water
62 g (334 Tbsp) tomato
paste
49 g (3 Tbsp) tomato paste
360 g (12½ cups + 1 Tbsp) 285 g (114 cups) 225 g (1 cup) 426 g (13/4 cups + 2 Tbsp) 331 g (11/½ cups)
360 g (11/2 cups +1 Tbsp) 285 g (114 cups) 225 g (1 cup) 426 g (13/4 cups + 2 Tbsp) 331 g (11/2 cups)
408 g (12/3 cups) 323 g (113 cups) 255 g (1 cup) 483 g (2 cups) 375 g (11/½ cups)
422 g (13/½ cups + 2 Tbsp) 334 g (11/2 cups) 265 g (1 cup + 2/½ Tbsp) 500 g (2 cups + 3 Tbsp) 389 g (13/4 cups)
65 g (1/½ cup)
83 g (3 cup)
235 g (1 cup +2 Tbsp)
53 g (14 cup)
100 g (½ cup)
315 g (2/½ cups)
132 g (/½ cup)
105 g (3/4 cup)
132 g (½ cup)
375 g (134 cups)
84 g (1/3 cup)
79 g (13 cup +1 Tbsp)
250 g (2 cups)
104 g (/½ cup + 2 Tbsp)
83 g (/½ cup)
104 g (1/3 cup + 2 Tbsp)
297 g (11/3 cups)
67 g (14 cup)
63 g (1½ cup)
200 g (13/4cup)
83 g (3 cup)
118 g (2/3 cup)
373 g (3 cups)
91 g (1½ cup)
290 g (2/½ cups +1 Tbsp)
156 g (2/3 cup) 121 g (1/2 cup)
124 g (1 cup) 97 g (34 cup)
156 g (3/3 cup) 121 g (1/2 cup)
444 g (2 cups) 345 g (12/3 cups)
100 g (3 cup +1 Tbsp) 77 g (3 cup)
408 g (12/3 cups) 323 g (114 cups) 255 g (1 cup) 483 g (2 cups) 375 g (1/½ cups)
408 g (12/3 cups) 323 g (11/4 cups) 255 g (1 cup) 483 g (2 cups) 375 g (1/2 cups)
315 g (114 cups) 250 g (1 cup) 200 g (34 cup +11/½ Tbsp) 373 g (11/½ cups) 290 g (114 cups)
347 g (1/½ cups +1 Tbsp) 275 g (11/4 cups) 220 g (1 cup) 410 g (134 cups + 2 Tbsp) 319 g (11/½ cups)
313 g (11/3 cups) 248 g (1 cup) 195 g (34 cup +11/½ Tbsp) 370 g (11/2 cups) 288 g (114 cups)
315 g (114 cups) 250 g (1 cup) 200 g (34 cup +11/2 Tbsp) 373 g (11/½ cups) 290 g (114 cups)
375 g (13/4 cups) 297 g (11/3 cups) 235 g (1 cup +11/½ Tbsp) 444 g (2 cups) 345 g (12/3 cups)
375 g (11/2 cups) 297 g (11/4 cups) 235 g (1 cup) 444 g (13/4 cups) 345 g (11/2 cups)
360 g (1½ cups +1 Tbsp) 285 g (1 cup + 2 Tbsp) 225 g (34 cup +2 Tbsp) 426 g (12½ cups) 331 g (17½ cups)
431 g (134 cups + 2 Tbsp) 341 g (1/½ cups) 270 g (1 cup + 2/½ Tbsp) 510 g (2 cups +3 Tbsp) 396 g (13/4 cups)
375 g (11/½ cups) 297 g (1 cup + 3 Tbsp) 235 g (1 cup) 444 g (13/4 cups) 345 g (11/2 cups)
408 g (13/4 cups) 323 g (113 cups + 1 Tbsp( 255 g (1 cup +11/2 Tbsp) 483 g (2 cups +1 Tbsp) 375 g (12/3 cups)
CONTINUED ON PAGE 188
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 187
7
PUREE TYPE THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH DEEP-DISH PIZZA
SEE PAGE 110 DOUGH SEE PAGE 118
NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 124
NEW YORK PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 132
BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
PIZZA DOUGH SEE PAGE 114
Leafy green puree: nettle puree, spinach puree, watercress puree, purslane puree
Nettle puree
Spinach puree*
Spring garlic puree
21.05 130 g (1½ cup)
67.57 416 g (134 cups)
15.79 97 g (13 cup +1 Tbsp)
Allium puree: spring garlic puree, scallion puree, onion puree, leek puree, ramp puree
Pressure-caramelized vegetable puree: pressure-caramelized shiitake mushroom puree, pressure-cooked cauliflower puree,
pressure-caramelized carrot puree, pressure-caramelized zucchini puree (see page 279)
80 g (1½ cup) 125 g (1/½ cup) 124 g (1½ cup)
257 g (1 cup +1 Tbsp) 402 g (134 cups) 399 g (13/4 cups)
60 g (14 cup) 94 g (3 cup + 1 Tbsp) 93 g (3 cup +1Tbsp)
Pressure-caramelized 55.46 341 g (11/3 cups) 211 g (34 cup +2 Tbsp) 330 g (11½ cups) 327 g (11½ cups)
shiitake mushroom
puree*
flower puree*
Pressure-cooked cauli- 68.92 424 g (134 cups + 1 Tbsp)
Fruit puree: pineapple puree, black fig puree, berry puree, currant puree, mango puree, apricot puree, peach puree, plum puree, cherry puree
262 g (1 cup +2 Tbsp) 410 g (134 cups) 407 g (134 cups)
Pineapple puree* 50 308 g (1½ cups) 190 g (34 cup +1 Tbsp) 298 g (11/4 cups) 295 g (114 cups)
Black fig puree* 57.58 354 g (11/½ cups +1 Tbsp) 219 g (1 cup) 343 g (11/½ cups) 340 g (11/½ cups)
*Substitute the puree for an equal amount ofwater in the dough.
**Add when the dough has reached low gluten development.
***Add with the fat in the recipe.
****Add when the dough has reached medium gluten development, and then mix to full gluten development.
Puree Variation Notes
Forthe roasted red pepper, puree 80 g
(/½ cup) drained canned roasted red peppers
and pass through a fine sieve before weighing the amount for the dough. You can also
roast your own peppers, if desired. Place a
red bell pepper on a sheet pan. Drizzle with
olive oil. Roast in a 230°C/450° F oven until
the skin has blistered, about 35 min. Place in
a bowl, and cover tightly with plastic wrap.
Cool for 15 min. Remove the skin, stem, and
seeds. Puree in a blender to a smooth consistency and pass through a fine sieve. Use 65 g
(14 cup) puree as directed above. Store any
additional puree in an airtight container in
the freezer for up to 2 mo.
For the carrot puree, cut 200 g (this should
yield 17/2 cups) peeled carrots into medium
dice. Bring a large pot of lightly salted water
to a boil. Boil the carrots until tender, about
5 min. Transfer to the ice bath until completely chilled. Drain the carrots and transfer
to a blender with 225 g (1 cup) water. Puree
the carrots until smooth.
For the huitlacoche puree, combine 165 g
(34 cup) fresh, thawed frozen, or drained
canned huitlacoche and 165 g (23 cup) water
in a blender, and process until smooth.
Depending on where you live, fresh huitlacoche may be available, but it is more likely
you will find it frozen or canned in Mexican
or specialty food stores (see Resources, page
3:377). If you use canned, substitute the
water from the can for the water called for in
the recipe. Supplement with additional
water if needed.
For the tomato puree, remove the stems from
2.2 kg/4.85 lb (10-12 large) tomatoes.
Quarter and puree in a blender for a few seconds, until the mixture is slightly chunky, not
smooth. Line a sieve with a clean towel, and
set it over a bowl or tub. Place the blended
tomatoes in the lined sieve, and refrigerate
10-12 h, covered, until the liquid has separated from the solids. Store any leftover
tomato water in an airtight container in the
freezer for up to 3 mo. The tomato's acidity
has a positive effect on the dough, yielding an
open crumb as well as good flavor and color.
For the roasted zucchini puree, slice 650 g
zucchini into 6 mm /1½ in rounds (this
should yield about 434 cups). Toss with 20 g
(1 Tbsp +1 tsp) olive oil. Roast in a 190°C/
375° F oven until tender, about 40 min. Cool
to room temperature. Puree in a blender
until smooth. Mix 85 g (11 cup +2 Tbsp)
puree with 200 g (34 cup + 2 Tbsp) water.
This may seem like way too much zucchini
when you need only 85 g, but a lot of water
evaporates during roasting.
For the sautéed onion puree, peel and cut
370 g onion into thin slices (this should yield
about 3 cups). Toss with 20 g (1 Tbsp +1 tsp)
olive oil in a medium skillet. Sauté over
medium-high heat until tenderand amberbrown, about 5-7 min, stirring frequently.
Cool to room temperature. Puree in a
blender until smooth. Mix 85 g (14 cup +
2 Tbsp) puree with 200 g (34 cup + 2 Tbsp)
water.
188 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
ARTISAN PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 142
FOCACCIA DOUGH
SEE PAGE 148
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 152
HIGH-HYDRATION
AL TAGLIO PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 158
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
DOUGH SEE PAGE 166
132 g (1/½ cup)
422 g (13/4 cups)
99 g (13 cup +1 Tbsp)
104 g (13 cup + 2 Tbsp)
334 g (11/2 cups)
78 g (13 cup)
83 g (13 cup)
265 g (1 cup + 2/½ Tbsp)
62 g (14 cup)
156 g (2/½ cup)
500 g (2 cups + 2 Tbsp)
117 g (/½ cup)
121 g (1½ cup)
389 g (134 cups)
91 g (13 cup +1 Tbsp)
347 g (11/3 cups + 1 Tbsp)
431 g (13/4 cups + 2 Tbsp)
275 g (1 cup +2 Tbsp)
341 g (11/½ cups)
220 g (34 cup + 2/½ Tbsp)
270 g (1 cup + 2/½ Tbsp)
410 g (12/3 cups)
510 g (2 cups + 3 Tbsp)
319 g (173 cups)
396 g (134 cups)
313 g (113 cups)
360 g (11/½ cups + 1 Tbsp)
248 g (1 cup +1 Tbsp)
285 g (14 cups)
195 g (34 cup +1 Tbsp)
225 g (1 cup)
370 g (11/½ cups)
426 g (134 cups + 2 Tbsp)
288 g (114 cups)
331 g (11/½ cups)
For the kimchi puree, puree 200 g (1 cup)
store-bought or homemade kimchi in a
blender until smooth (do not drain before
pureeing). Mix 120 g (/½ cup) kimchi puree
with 320 g (11/3 cups) water.
For the poblano pepper puree, toss 850 g
(6 ea) whole poblano peppers with 10 g
(2 tsp) olive oil until evenly coated. Roast in a
245°C/475° F oven until blistered, about
20 min. Remove the seeds, stems, and skin
from the peppers. Puree in a blender until
smooth. Combine 150 g (1/½ cup +2 Tbsp) of
the poblano puree with 360 g (1/½ cups +
1 Tbsp) water. Store any leftover puree in an
airtight container in the freezer for up to
3 mo.
For the chestnut puree, combine 145 g (1 cup)
peeled chestnuts with 330 g (11/½ cups) water
in a blender and puree until smooth.
For the edamame puree, puree 100 g
(1/½ cup) shelled fresh orthawed frozen
edamame in a blender until smooth.
For the silken tofu puree, puree 190 g (34 cup
+1Tbsp +1 tsp) water and 190 g (1 cup) silken
tofu until smooth.
We used red mole in creating our mole
sauce puree, but there are many different
kinds (black, green, yellow), each with its
own flavor profile, so feel free to experiment.
You can also substitute adobo paste. For
more on where to purchase mole sauce, see
Resources, page 3:377.
For the romesco sauce puree, mix 120 g
(1/½ cup) romesco sauce with 320 g (11/3 cups)
water.
For the marinara sauce puree, mix 120 g
(1/½ cup) Marinara Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 225) with 320 g (11½ cups) water.
For the salsify puree, cut 300 g (this should
yield 2½ cups) peeled salsify into medium
dice. Toss the salsify with 15 g (1 Tbsp) neutral
oil and roast in a 218°C/425°F oven until
lightly golden brown and tender, 15-20 min,
turning occasionally.While still warm, transfer the salsify to a blender and add 300 g
(11/3 cups) water. Puree until smooth. Cool
the puree over an ice bath.
For the hearts of palm puree, transfer the
contents of one 400 g (14 oz) can of hearts of
palm to a blender and puree until smooth.
For the artichoke puree, puree 285 g
(174 cups) water and 90 g (2/3 cup) canned
drained artichoke hearts until smooth.
For the Kalamata olive puree, puree 280 g
(14 cups) water and 95 g (34 cup) pitted
Kalamata olives until smooth. We chose to
make this with Kalamatas because of their
intensity, but you can use any type of olive
you prefer.
For the green olive puree, puree 250 g
(2 cups) pitted green Castelvetrano
olives in a blender until smooth. Mix 85 g
(14 cup + 2 Tbsp) puree with 200 g (3/4 cup +
2 Tbsp) water.
For the black garlic puree, puree 135 g (1 cup)
peeled black garlic cloves (see Resources,
page 3:377) with 135 g (1/½ cup + 1 Tbsp) water
in a blender until smooth. Combine 150 g
(1/½ cup +2 Tbsp) black garlic puree with
360 g (1½ cups + 1 Tbsp) water. Store any
leftover puree in an airtight container in
the freezer for up to 3 mo.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 189
7
For the herb puree, blanch 40 g (2 cups,
loosely packed) fresh parsley leaves and 36 g
(1½ cups, loosely packed) fresh chives in
boiling water for 30 s. Drain, and transfer to
an ice bath. When the herbs have completely cooled, drain on a clean kitchen
towel. Squeeze the towel to remove excess
moisture. This should yield approximately
25 g blanched herbs. Transfer to a blender.
Add 350 g (1/½ cups) water, and puree until
smooth.
For the squid ink puree, add 5 g (1 tsp) squid
ink (see Resources, page 3:377) to 380 g
(12/3 cups) water.
For the nettle puree, blanch 120 g (34 cup)
nettle leaves in boiling water for 8-10 s.
Drain, and transfer to an ice bath. When the
nettles have completely cooled, drain on a
clean kitchen towel. Squeeze the towel to
remove excess moisture. Puree in a blender
until smooth.
For the spinach puree, blanch 550 g
(1534 cups) spinach leaves in boiling water
for 30 s. Drain, and transfer to an ice bath.
When the spinach has completely cooled,
drain on a clean kitchen towel. Pat dry, leaving some water on the leaves. Puree in a
blender until smooth. Combine 150 g (1½ cup
+ 2 Tbsp) spinach puree with 360 g (1½ cups
+1 Tbsp) water. Store any leftover puree in
an airtight container in the freezer for up to
3 mo.
For the spring garlic puree, blanch 120 g
(34 cup) trimmed spring garlic cloves in boilingwater for 30-40 s. Drain, and transfer to
an ice bath. When the garlic has completely
cooled, drain on a clean kitchen towel.
Squeeze the towel to remove excess moisture. Puree in a blender until smooth.
For the pineapple puree, combine 150 g
(/3 cup) water and 145 g (34 cup) canned
pineapple juice. You can use fresh pineapple
juice, but make sure to bring it to a simmer
first, and then cool it down before using. This
will deactivate the bromelain enzyme that
would otherwise break down the proteins in
the dough (that's why fresh pineapple juice is
called for when it's being used as a dough
relaxer).
For the black fig puree, mix 85 g (14 cup +
2 Tbsp) store-bought fig puree with 200 g
(34 cup +2 Tbsp) water.
SUNCHOKE PUREE
Yield: 475 g (14 cups + 2 Tbsp)
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Sunchokes, peeled and cut 250 g 5 to 6 ea 100
into large dice
Olive oil 12.5 g 23/4 tsp 5
Fine salt 2.5 g 1/½ tsp
Water 415 g 134 cups 166
GRILLED CORN PUREE
Yield: 670 g (22½ cups)
INGREDIENTS
Sweet yellow corn on the
cob
Vegetable oil
Water
190
WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING %
1.2 kg 4 ears 100
as needed
335 g 1½ cups 27.91
The sunchokes should yield about 11½ cups dice after peeling and cutting. Combine the sunchokes, oil, and salt in a bowl, and toss to evenly
coat the sunchokes. Place on a sheet pan lined with aluminum foil,
and roast at 220°C/425° F until cooked through and golden brown,
about 15 min, turning halfway through. Cool and transfer to a blender.
Add 250 g (1 cup + 1 Tbsp +1 tsp) of the water, and puree until smooth.
Pass through a fine sieve into a nonreactive container. Combine 165 g
(34 cup) puree with the remaining water. Store any leftover puree in
an airtight containerin the freezer for up to 3 mo.
Preheat a grill to high heat. As the grill is heating, remove the husks and
all the silk from the corn, and brush a thin layer of oil on the cobs. Grill
for 5-7 min, turning the corn with a pair of tongs every 30 s or so to
obtain an even char on the surface. Allow the corn to cool to room
temperature, and then cut the kernels off the cobs. This should yield
about 335 g (2 cups) cooked corn kernels. Place the corn in a blender
with the water and puree until smooth. Pass through a fine sieve, and
cool down over an ice bath.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PRESSURE-CARAMELIZED SHIITAKE
MUSHROOM PUREE
Yield: 550g (2 cups)
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Butter 60 g 14 cup 24
Shiitake mushrooms, cleaned, 250 g 44 cups 100
stemmed, and thinly sliced
Fine salt 2.5 g 1/½ tsp 1
Baking soda 1.25 g 1/4 tsp 0.5
Water 265 g
1 cup +2
Tbsp
106
In some cases, our puree recipes yield more than what you need for 1 kg of dough
because making smallquantities is more difficultthan making a large batch and
freezing the leftover puree.
FOR PRESSURE COOKER
Melt the butter in the base of a pressure cooker over medium heat.
Add the mushrooms, salt, and baking soda, and stir to evenly distribute. Add 30 g (2 Tbsp) of the water. Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure
of 1 bar/15 psi for 30 min; start timing when full pressure is reached.
Depressurize the cooker quickly by running tepid water over the rim.
Transfer the mushrooms to a blender, and add the remaining water.
Puree until smooth, pass through a fine sieve into a nonreactive container, and cool to 21° C/70°F. Store any leftover puree in an airtight
container in the freezer for up to 3 mo.
FOR INSTAPOT
Set the instapot to Sauté. Melt the butter in the base of the cooker.
Add the mushrooms, salt, and baking soda, and stir to evenly distribute. Add 30 g (2 Tbsp) of the water. Switch the instapot to Pressure
Cook mode. Select 12 psi (High) and set the time for 1 h. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-caramelize the mushrooms. When the
instapot has depressurized, cool the contents. Proceed with the
remaining puree steps in the pressure cooker instructions above.
PRESSURE-CARAMELIZED CAULIFLOWER PUREE
Yield: 575 g (2/½cups)
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING%
Cauliflower florets, 1.25 cm /
114 in thick
600 g 6 cups 100
Olive oil 10 g 2 tsp 1.67
Baking soda 3 g 1/½ tsp 0.5
Water 360 g 11/½ cups + 60
1 Tbsp
FOR PRESSURE COOKER
Combine the cauliflower, oil, and baking soda in the base of a pressure
cooker over medium heat. Lightly sweat the cauliflower. Pressure-cook
at a gauge pressure of 1 bar /15 psi for 30 min; start timing when full
pressure is reached. Depressurize the cooker quickly by running tepid
water over the rim. Puree the mixture in a blender (or use an immersion blender) until smooth, and then pass through a fine sieve.
Combine 150 g (1½ cup +2 Tbsp) of the cauliflower puree with the
water. Store any leftover puree in an airtight container in the freezer
for up to 3 mo.
FOR INSTAPOT
Set the instapot to Sauté. Combine the cauliflower, oil, and baking
soda, and stir to evenly distribute. Lightly sweat the cauliflower. Switch
the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select 12 psi (High) and set the
time for 1 h. Lock the lid onto the pot and pressure-caramelize the
cauliflower.When the instapot has depressurized, cool the contents.
Proceed with the remaining puree steps in the pressure cooker instructions above.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 191
7
SUBMASTER RECIPE
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
GLUTEN-FREE THIN-CRUST PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ %
Water, 21°C/70°F 412 g 134 cups 69.24
Active 15 min/
Inactive 3½ h
three 50 cm/20 in pizzas
or four 40 cm / 16 in pizzas
Instant dry yeast 4.8 g 134 tsp 0.81
Gluten-Free Flour Blend 595 g 334 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
see page 199 Ingredients Weight %
Fine-ground cornmeal 55 g 1/½ cup 9.24
Gluten-free flour blend 595 g 100 Fine salt 13 g 24 +18 tsp 2.18
Water 412 g 69.24
Yield: ~1 kg Cornmeal 55 g
9.24
Salt 13 g 2.18
Yeast 4.8 g 0.81 GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BENCH REST
combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the gluten-free flour
blend, cornmeal, and salt, and mix on low speed with
the paddle attachment until combined; scrape down
the sides of the bowl and the paddle; mix on medium
speed until fully incorporated; transfer to a generously
oiled tub
20 min; cover well
DIVIDE 50 cm/20 in: 360 g
40 cm/16 in: 270 g
PRESHAPE ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
PROOF 2-3 h at 21°C/70°F, covered; optional cold-proof for
1dat 4°C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions, see
page 3:12; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:19
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll the dough
out and make the pizza. We recommend cold-proofing the
dough, however, because it produces a crispier, crunchier
thin-crust pizza. If you cold-proof the dough, remove it from
refrigeration 11/½-2 h before baking so it warms up and is easier
to stretch out.
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call
for thin-crust pizza dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on
page 3:3.
GLUTEN-FREE THIN-CRUST PIZZA
DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for
Gluten-Free Thin-Crust Pizza Dough at left. Replace the
gluten-free flour blend with Caputo Fiore Glut glutenfree flour.
192 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
GLUTEN-FREE BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST
PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 4 h
two 40 cm/16 in pizzas
or four 23 cm/9 in pizzas
Water, 21°C/70°F 325 g 14 cups +21/2
Tbsp
54.17
NET CONTENTS
Instant dry yeast 3 g 1/s tsp 0.5 Ingredients Weight
Gluten-Free Flour Blend 600 g 334 cups 100 Gluten-free flour blend 600 g 100
see page 199
Water 325 g
54.17 Extra-virgin olive oil 60 g 1/4 cup 10
Fat 60 g 10 Fine salt 18 g 1 Tbsp + 1/4 tsp 3
Salt 18 g
3
Yield: ~1 kg
Yeast 3g 0.5
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX
BULK
FERMENT
DIVIDE
combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the gluten-free flour
blend, oil, and salt, and mix on low speed with the
paddle attachment until the dough is a smooth, homogeneous mixture; transfer to a generously oiled tub
1 h at 21° C/70°F; cover well
40 cm/16 in: 500 g
20 cm/8 in: 250 g
PRESHAРЕ ball (see pages 60-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
PROOF 2-3 h at 21°C/70°F, covered; for shaping instructions,
see page 3:12; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:25
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call for Brazilian thin-crust
pizza dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
GLUTEN-FREE BRAZILIAN THINCRUST PIZZA DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for
Gluten-Free Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough at left.
Replace the gluten-free flour blend with Caputo
Fiore Glut gluten-free flour.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 193
7
SUBMASTER RECIPE
GLUTEN-FREE DEEP-DISH PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME 26
Water, 21°C/70°F 225 g 1 cup 59.21
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 3% h
two 21 cm by 5 cm deep/
8% in by 2 in deep pizzas
Instant dry yeast 3.1 g 18 tsp 0.82
Gluten-Free Flour Blend 380 g 21/½ cups 100 NET CONTENTS
see page 199 Ingredients Weight
Fine-ground cornmeal 40 g 13 cup 10.53 Gluten-free flour blend 380 g
100
Lard, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp + 3/4 tsp 4.74 Water 228 g 60
Butter, softened 18 g 1 Tbsp +3/4 tsp 4.74 Cornmeal 40 g 10.53
Fine salt 8 g 114 tsp +18 tsp 2.11 Fat 33 g 8.68
Yield: ~700 g
Salt 8 g
2.11
Yeast 3.1g 0.82
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the gluten-free flour
blend and cornmeal, and mix on low speed with the
paddle attachment to a shaggy mass; add the lard,
butter, and salt, and mix until the dough is a smooth,
homogeneous mixture; transfer to a generously oiled
DIVIDE 325 g
PRESHAPE
PROOF
BENCH REST
tub
20 min; cover well
After proofing at room temperature, you can roll the dough out and make the
pizza. We recommend cold-proofing the dough, however, because it produces
a crispier thin-crust pizza. If you cold-proof the dough, remove it from refrigeration 1/½-2 h before shaping so it warms up and is easier to stretch out.
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call for deep-dish pizza
dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
If you don't want to use lard, you can double the amount of butter in the dough.
ball (see pages 61-62); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
2-3 h at 21°C/70° F, covered; optional cold-proof for
1 d at 4° C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions, see
page 3:88; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:93
GLUTEN-FREE DEEP-DISH PIZZA
DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for
Gluten-Free Deep-Dish Pizza Dough at left. Replace
the gluten-free flour blend with Caputo Fiore Glut
gluten-free flour.
194 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
450 g
3 g
750 g
SUBMASTER RECIPЕ
GLUTEN-FREE NEAPOLITAN PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS
Water, 21°C/70°F
Instant dry yeast
Gluten-Free Flour Blend
see page 199
Fine salt
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
WEIGHТ VOLUME
2 cups 60
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 24% h
four 30 cm/12 in pizzas
1 tsp 0.4
434 cups 100 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight 19%
16.88g 1 Tbsp 2.25
Gluten-free flour blend 750 g
100
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2
Water 450 g
60
Yield: ~1.2kg Salt 16.88 g
2.25
Fat 15 g 2
Yeast 3 g 0.4
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the gluten-free flour
blend, salt, and oil, and mix on low speed with the
paddle attachment until the dough is a smooth, homogeneous mixture; transfer to a generously oiled tub
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well
DIVIDE 300 g
PRESHAPE
PROOF
ball (see page 60); place in a tub or on a sheet pan;
lightly mist with water; cover well
1dat 4°C/39° F, covered; for shaping instructions, see
page 3:36; for assembly and baking instructions, see
page 3:47
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call for Neapolitan pizza
dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
GLUTEN-FREE NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for Gluten-Free
Neapolitan Pizza Dough at left. Replace the gluten-free flour
blend with Caputo gluten-free flour.
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES 195
7
SUBMASTER RECIPE
GLUTEN-FREE NEW YORK/ARTISAN
PIZZA DOUGH
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ 1%
TOTAL TIME
☑
Active 15-20 min /
YIELD/SHAPE
three 35 cm/14 in pizzas
Inactive 2%h
Water, 21°C/70°F 460 g 2 cups 59.74
Instant dry yeast 3.5 g 1stsp 0.45 NET CONTENTS
Gluten-Free Flour Blend 770 g 43/4 cups +2 Tbsp 100 Ingredients Weight 2
see page 199
Gluten-free flour blend 770 g 100
Diastatic malt powder 20 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 2.6
Water 460 g 59.74
Fine salt 18 g 1 Tbsp +14 tsp 2.33
Fat 25 g 3.25 Extra-virgin olive oil 25 g 1 Tbsp + 21/4 tsp 3.25
Diastatic malt powder 18 g
2.33
Yield: ~1.3 kg Salt 18 g
2.33
Yeast 3.5 g
0.45
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
MIX combine the water and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and
whisk to dissolve the yeast; add the gluten-free flour
blend, malt powder, salt, and oil, and mix on low
speed with the paddle attachment until the dough is
a smooth, homogeneous mixture; transfer to a generously oiled tub
BENCH REST 20 min; cover well; oil four 35 cm diameter by 334 cm
deep/14 in diameter by 114 in deep pans with 70 g
(/3 cup) olive oil
DIVIDE 430 g
PRESHAРЕ
PROOF
ball (see pages 61-62); lightly dust the dough balls with
gluten-free flour blend; extend with a rolling pin to
approximately 35 cm / 14 in circles; place the dough in
the prepared pans and stretch the dough to the edges
of the pan
2 h at 21° C/70°F, covered, or 11/½ h at 27° C/80° F and
65% RH; for shaping instructions, see page 3:66; for
assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:71 or 3:77
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call for New York or artisan pizza
dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3. Top the pizza with 160 g (2/3 cup)
New York/ Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce and 195 g (2 cups + 2 Tbsp) pizza cheese.
GLUTEN-FREE NEW YORK/ARTISAN
PIZZA DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Mix through Proof instructions for
Gluten-Free New York/Artisan Pizza Dough above.
Replace the gluten-free flour blend with Caputo Fiore
Glut gluten-free flour.
196 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SUBMASTER RECIPE
GLUTEN-FREE PAN PIZZA DOUGH
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ
Brown rice flour 570 g 3 cups +2 Tbsp 70.81
Active 10-15 min /
Inactive 2h
one 46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in pizza
Tapioca flour 200 g 11/3 cups 24.84
Potato starch 35 g 2 Tbsp +2 tsp 4.35 NET CONTENTS
Nonfat milk powder 25 g 14 cup +1 tsp 3.11 Ingredients Weight
Fine salt 15 g 23/4 tsp 1.86 Brown rice flour 570 g 70.81
Water, 21°C/70°F 1 kg 41/3 cups 124.22 Tapioca flour 200 g
24.84
Sugar 35 g 3 Tbsp 4.35 Potato starch 35 g 4.35
Instant dry yeast 30 g 3 Tbsp + 2 tsp 3.73 Water 1 kg 124.22
Egg white 50 g 3 Tbsp +1 tsp 6.21 Egg white 50 g 6.21
Psyllium husk, optional 50 g 1/4 cup 6.21 Psyllium husk 50 g 6.21
Parmesan cheese, grated 15 g 2 Tbsp 1.86 Sugar 35 g 4.35
Fresh rosemary, minced 5g 1 Tbsp 0.62 Yeast 30 g 3.73
Yield: ~2 kg Milk powder 25 g 3.11
Salt 15 g 1.86
This gluten-free dough works in place of the New York square, focaccia, or highhydration al taglio doughs. If you are making gluten-free al taglio pizza, multiply
the recipe ingredients by 0.75 to make the 1.5 kg dough that you need, and bake
in a 60 cm by 40 cm/24 in by 16 in Roman al taglio pan.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP lightly oil a half sheet pan; line the pan with parchment
paper, and lightly oil the paper
SHAPE
MIX combine the brown rice flour, tapioca flour, potato
starch, milk powder, and salt; for focaccia, add the
Parmesan and rosemary to the dry ingredients, if
desired; combine the water, sugar, and yeast in the mixer's bowl, and whisk to dissolve the yeast; let stand for
5 min; whisk together the egg white and psyllium husk,
and let stand for 1 min; add egg white to yeast mixture,
pour the dry ingredients onto the yeast mixture, and mix
with the paddle attachment on medium speed for 3 min;
scrape down the sides of the bowl and the paddle, and
mix on medium speed for another 3 min
PROOF
PIZZA DOUGH RECIPES
transfer the dough to the prepared pan; drizzle a little
oil on the top of the dough; slowly spread the dough
with a spatula to the corners of the pan until it is filled
evenly; use the edge of the spatula to push down the
edges of the dough on the sides
2 h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 11/½ h at 27°C/80°F and
65% RH, coverd; for assembly and baking instructions,
see page 3:133
197
7
SUBMASTER RECIPЕ
GLUTEN-FREE DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA DOUGH
INSPIRED BY MEYERS MADHUS
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ
TOTAL TIME YIELD/SHAPE
(☑
Active: 18 min/
Inactive: 4% h
one 35 cm by 25 cm/
14 in by 10 in pizza
Water, 30-30.5°C/85-87° F 295 g 114 cups 60.2
Gluten-Free Flour Blend
see page 199
490 g 3 cups + 2 Tbsp 100 NET CONTENTS
Ingredients Weight %
Fine-ground cornmeal 85 g 2/3 cup 17.34 Gluten-free flour blend 490 g 100
Fine salt 11.5 g 2 tsp 2.34
Water 295 g 60.2
Sugar 8g 2 tsp 1.63
Cornmeal 85 g 17.34
Instant dry yeast 5.2g 2 tsp 1.06
Salt 11.5 g 2.34
Yield: ~900 g
Sugar 8 g 1.63
Yeast 5.2 g 1.06
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
PREP
MIX
BENCH REST
oil a full-sized Detroit pan with 20 g (1 Tbsp +1 tsp)
olive oil
pour the water into the mixer's bowl; add the glutenfree flour blend, cornmeal, salt, sugar, and yeast, and
mix on low speed with the paddle attachment; scrape
down the sides of the bowl and the paddle; mix on
medium speed until fully incorporated; transfer to a
generously oiled tub, turning it over to coat it fully with
the oil, and shape into a rectangle
15 min; cover well
SHAPE
PROOF
transfer the dough to the prepared pan seam side
down, trying to maintain the rectangular shape; coat
the surface ofthe dough lightly with oil, and stretch the
dough gently but assertively without damaging it to try
to fill the pan evenly, making sure the corners are sharp
4-5 h at 21°C/70°F, covered, or 3 h at 27°C/80°F
and 65% RH; after the first hour of proofing, stretch the
dough out again to fill the pan as evenly as possible; for
assembly and baking instructions, see page 3:109
Use this dough as the foundation for any pizzas that call for Detroit-style pizza
dough in the Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
GLUTEN-FREE DETROIT-STYLE
PIZZA DOUGH VARIATION
Follow the Prep through Proof instructions for Gluten-Free
Detroit-Stle Pizza Dough above. Replace the gluten-free
flour blend with Caputo Fiore Glut gluten-free flour.
198 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
GLUTEN-FREE FLOUR BLEND
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
White rice flour 225 g 12/3 cups 23.2
Brown rice flour 100 g 34 cup 10.31
Glutinous rice flour 70 g 2/3 cup 7.22
Cornstarch 350 g 23/4 cups 36.08
Tapioca starch 225 g 134 cups 23.2
Nonfat milk powder* 100 g 3/4 cup +2 Tbsp 10.31
Xanthan gum 10 g 1 Tbsp 1.03
Transglutaminase TI or WM, optional 9.7 g 1 Tbsp 1
Yield~1kg
*Omit the milk powderto make thisflour blendvegan.
1 Whisk all the ingredients together in a large
bowl until homogeneous.
Transglutaminase is typically used as a "meat glue" that
binds meat proteins to each other (it is often used in sausage making). But we found that it also binds the proteins in
this flour blend. We tested transglutaminase to see whether
it would act the same way as gluten does when added to а
weak flour dough.While we didn't get any volume increase,
we did notice a chew and consistency to the crumb that
made it much more like wheat bread.
If you use transglutaminase in your gluten-free flour blend,
you will have to freeze the entire quantity of the blend
because the enzymes in the transglutaminase do not survive
for long at room temperature. If you do freeze the flour mix,
pull only what you need from the freezer, and let it warm up
at room temperature for 1-2 h before you mix your dough.
After each batch of flour is finely ground,
sift it. The flour blend (without transglutaminase) will keep for 2 mo in an airtight
container at room temperature. We recommend freezing the blend (with or without transglutaminase) for up to 3 mo in
portions large enough to make one recipe
at a time.
2
Transfer the mixture in batches to a food
processor, making sure not to fill it more
than halfway, and process until finely
ground, 1-2 min.
3
For more on where to find many of these ingredients, see Resources, page 3:377.
7
CHAPTER 8
SAUCE
Clao
Pomodoro di Napolia
AUTHENTICA
Italian Peeled
Product of Italy Crushed Tomatoes
in tomato puree
WHY WE PUT SAUCE ON PIZZA 204
APPLYING SAUCE 205
TOMATO SAUCES 210
THICKENING SAUCES 242
DAIRY-BASED SAUCES 250
EMULSION-BASED SAUCES 259
STOCKS, SOUPS, AND PASTA SAUCES
AS PIZZA SAUCE 268
6 lb 9 oz (3000gr)
VEGETABLE- AND FRUIT-BASED SAUCES 278
SAUCE
You can make pizza without cheese. You can make
it without toppings. But to many, if it doesn't have
some kind of sauce on top, it's probably not pizza.
In fact, sauce is one of the main elements that distinguishes pizza from bread. And it's part of the reason
we don't consider focaccia to be pizza (see page
1:4), although we've included it in this book because
it can make a great foundation for pizza.
Sauce can be as simple as a drizzle of heavy
cream on a disc of dough (see page 250) or
more labor-intensive, such as a mole or a thick,
homemade tomato sauce. It can be traditional or
unexpected, raw or cooked, savory or sweet. But
no matter what sauce you choose, you'll need to
take into account many of the same considerations:
What's going to happen to the sauce while it bakes?
What do I want the consistency of the finished
sauce to be? How will the sauce affect the other
toppings-will it bind with them or be a wet mess?
How much is the "right" amount?
Here's one test that helps answer some of those
questions: When you lift the slice, does everything
slide off? If it does, the culprit is often too much
sauce. It might also be a sauce that's too wet. Also,
does your pizza have a gummy gel layer on top of
the baked dough? That can be a ssauce problem,
too. Use just enough sauce to meld with the dough
and the toppings-no more.
Even with that caveat, your results can, and should,
vary. In a New York pizza, the sauce and cheese
practically merge into a single component, while in
a Neapolitan pizza, they're two completely separate
entities. In a deep-dish pizza, the sauce goes on top.
The most common sauce used for pizza is
tomato, of course, but don't stop there. Even the
AVPN (see page 1:74) allows a green (basil pesto)
or white (cheese-based) sauce on its Neapolitan
pizzas. But the varieties of sauce go well beyond the
Italian flag trifecta and are truly endless.
White sauces can be a particularly rich avenue for
exploration-even the question of what constitutes a
white sauce can inspire creativity. A white sauce can
be a béchamel; it can involve a smear of ricotta and
cream; you can even crack open a burrata onto a disc
of dough and call it white sauce. We will cover the
range ofwhite sauces, including tips on how to make
them work for different kinds of pizza, on page 251.
The chapter goes well beyond traditional recipes.
We'll cover egg-based sauces, stock-based sauces,
and pasta sauces remade for pizza.We performed
experiments for transforming soups and storebought sauces into pizza sauces.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
How to solve the marinara sauce dilemma (see page 222)
How to improve tomato sauce (see page 232)
Mix-and-Match Tomato Sauce (see page 235)
How to adapt purchased soups as pizza sauce (see page 247)
Outside-of-the-Box Pizza Sauces (see page 256)
The tomatoes in the photo on the previous
page wouldn't be used for industrial canning
(forgive us artistic license in this case!) but
could easily be preserved in a home setting
either as whole tomatoes or as a canned sauce.
203
8
There are a multitude of ways to sauce a pizza,
depending on the style. The Sicilian pizzas
being made above and the Detroit-style pizza
shown at left, below, are sauced before baking.
while we prefer to apply the sauce after baking.
Certain styles, like the pizza gourmet shown in
the center, below, are always sauced after baking. Ingredients like eggs (see photo at right,
below) are added close to the end of baking or
after baking so that they don't overcook.
WHY WE PUT SAUCE ON PIZZA
In general cooking, a sauce has two main purposes:
to add moisture to a dish and to contribute flavor. In
pizza making, sauce serves several additional functions. Understanding these functions will help you
get your desired result. In thin-crust and mediumcrust pizzas, sauce "protects" the center of the pizza
dough, keeping it flat and preventing it from expanding and bubbling up during baking (see page 1:369).
In addition, the sauce essentially acts as a heat sink
that cannot get above 100°C / 212° F unless all of
its water evaporates (see page 1:369). This property
allows sauce to shield delicate toppings from the
blistering heat of the oven, which is why we cover
certain ingredients, like clams, with sauce before
baking them in the oven.
Not all sauces work for all pizzas. You'll find
that the amount of liquid matters, and there's an
interplay between viscosity, baking time, and baking
temperature. That's why we recommend a particular
type of tomato sauce for almost every style of
pizza. For example, the wettest tomato sauce in the
chapter is the one for Neapolitan pizza. Neapolitan
pizza bakes in an extremely hot oven, so the water
in the sauce begins to evaporate within seconds.
By the end of baking, the wet sauce will evaporate
just enough to leave a smooth, pulpy sauce over the
dough rather than a burnt paste.
Conversely, a New York pizza needs a thicker sauce
with less water. Ifthe sauce is too wet, you'll wind
up with a gummy pizza with a puddle of sauce in the
middle. That's because it bakes at a much lower temperature and for a longer time than a Neapolitan pizza
dough (5-6 minutes at 285°C / 550°F as opposed
to 60-90 seconds at 425-480° C/800-900°F). This
concept doesn't apply to just tomato sauces; it applies
to all types of sauces.
Another crucial aspect of the saucing step is its
temperature. As a general rule, you should never
apply cold sauce to a dough because it will drop the
dough temperature and impact the baking time.
Sometimes, a cold sauce can be a contributing cause
of a gel layer, or gum line (see page 1:370). We
recommend tempering sauces at room temperature
for 2 hours before using. In a few instances, such
as Detroit-style and deep-dish pizzas, we apply the
sauce after baking. Unlike all of our other sauces,
these are heated and spooned on hot.
THE QUESTION OF WHERE TO SAUCE YOUR PIZZA
Should you apply the sauce when the dough is
on the worktable? Or after you've slid the dough
onto the peel or screen? The AVPN tells people
not to assemble Neapolitan pizzas on the peel but
even top pizzaioli in Naples don't agree. Franco
Pepe (see page 1:161) sauces his dough on the peel
while Enzo Coccia (see page 1:164) dresses his
pizza on the workbench and then pulls the dough
onto the peel. There are strong opinions on both
methods and pizza makers fall into either camp,
depending on their preferences and the style of
pizza that they make.
Ultimately, it depends on your comfort level
and expertise. In general, we prefer to sauce on a
worktable and then transfer to a peel. The act of
spreading the sauce on the dough means you're
204
pushing down on the dough, pressing it into the
surface below. If you are assembling the pizza
on a screen or perforated peel, be careful to not
push the dough into or through the holes. You
want to be able to slide it into the oven quickly
and easily.
Whether you're saucing on the worktable or on
the peel, it will slide more easily if you're using the
proper amount of flour under the dough. Lightly
oiling a screen with cooking spray will help the
dough release after it bakes partway in the oven
(the oil will also create a crispier bottom). We give
detailed instructions for shaping, saucing, and
topping different pizza styles in the Iconic Recipes
chapter on page 3:3. You'll see how to assemble
pizza both on a peel and on a workbench.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
In general, we prefer to sauce and top pizzas on the
worktable because it gives you a little more time
than if you dress the pizza on a peel. If you dress the
pizza on the peel, you must work quickly so that it
doesn't stick.
APPLYING SAUCE
A wet sauce applied before baking is a key element
to a traditional pizza. That wet sauce cools the
center of the pizza and keeps it from rising. And
even distribution is extremely important. One could
argue that sauce is the critical difference between
pizza and putting some toppings on bread. It also
happens that the most common sauce, which helped
pizza's rise in popularity, is an acidic red sauce.
This sauce, typically made with tomatoes, is a good
counterpoint to the melted cheese. Tomato-based
sauces are different than most other sauces used in
professional kitchens because they often aren't made
in-house from fresh ingredients. Pizzaioli often just
puree and season some form of canned tomatoes.
The most important characteristic of a successful
pizza sauce is how wet it is. The perfect consistency
and amount of water depend on how the pizza will
be baked and the style attributes you are trying to
achieve. If your sauce is too wet, you will end up with
a soupy pizza. If it's too dry, it might burn in the oven.
The cooling effect of the sauce can contribute
to the formation of a gel layer. Whether cheese
is directly against the dough or not also plays a
part. There are also particular pizzas, like Trenton
tomato pies, that are said to be defined by saucing
on top. We think the order of sauce and cheese
gets talked about too much. We did extensive
experiments (see page 207) and found there will
be less of a gel layer if you have the cheese against
the dough, then sauce. This is especially important
for bread-like pizzas such as New York square.
It is thick-crusted and takes a long time to bake,
so applying the cheese first helps to keep it from
burning before the crust is done.
Find the piece of saucing equipment that suits
you best and stick with it. This could be a wide
metal spoon, a ladle, or a spoodle (pictured
above), which has a flat bottom that allows
you to spread the sauce evenly.
For more on how sauce behaves during baking.
see The Effects of Sauce Reflectivity on Pizza
on page 1:369.
SAUCE 205
For refrigerated sauces, always
bring them up to room temperature
before applying to the pizza. Some
sauces, like those used on Detroitstyle pizza, should be heated before
topping the pizza.
Philosophically we consider handcrushed tomatoes to be more of a topping than a sauce; a true sauce should
be more uniform in consistency.
For more on how to transfer dough using a
peel, see page 390.
There is another method of sauce application
similar to what many chefs do when they're saucing
composed dishes. Pizzaioli making Detroit-style
and deep-dish pizzas apply the sauce à la minute,
just before it is served. Both ofthese pizzas take a
long time to bake, and the sauce can significantly
impact that process. That's because sauce contains
a lot of water, and when it covers a thick piece of
pizza dough, the heat will radiate very poorly and
very slowly toward the center of the crust. Taking
the sauce out of the equation from the beginning
significantly reduces baking time. For these types of
pizzas, we keep the sauce hot and spoon or pipe it on
top immediately after baking.
If you've ever watched a pizza being made at
a pizzeria, you've probably seen how quickly and
APPLYING SAUCE BEFORE BAKING
effectively the pizzaiolo applies the sauce and how it
always seems to be just the right amount. This is no
accident. Part of that comes from experience, but it
also has to do with using the right tools. They likely
tested a number of spoons and ladles, looking for one
that would hold just the right amount of sauce. The
most experienced pizzaioli will make a seemingly
perfect spiral of sauce on the dough (always starting
from the center and making their way out). The faster
you can do this, the more pizzas you can sell.
Using a dedicated sauce spoon, called a spoodle,
helps achieve consistency. Part of what helps spread
the sauce evenly on the dough is the design of the
spoon or ladle. Some have a somewhat flat base that
helps push the sauce around evenly (see page 10),
but not so much that the dough peeks through.
Many of our sauces are applied to pizza dough before baking. Tomato sauce is generally applied in the center of the pizza and
then spread out toward the rim. Many dairy-based sauces can be spread on the dough in a similar fashion before baking or, if
they are thicker, like a soft cheese, they can be spooned on so that they'll melt with the mozzarella or other toppings. We'll show
you how to apply sauces before baking in our Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3.
APPLYING SAUCE AFTER BAKING
For some of our pan pizzas, including New York square and deep-dish, the main sauce is applied after baking. The sauces can be
piped on (above, right), like in the Detroit-style pizza on page 3:109, or they can be spread on (see photo at left, above). When we
talk about sauces being applied after baking, we don't include things like balsamic vinegar glaze, sriracha, or a ranch drizzle since
those function more as a garnish than a true sauce.
206
M
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
While spooning a sauce is the most common
method, some sauces are best applied using other
tools. If you're using a very liquid sauce, a squeeze
bottle will give you the best control. A very thick
sauce is best extruded through a piping bag; just
move it across the top of the dough as you squeeze.
Whatever tool you use, efficiency counts. Once
you have shaped the dough, the clock is ticking.
If you take too long, two things might happen.
First, the dough will get sticky on the bottom
and not slide onto your peel with ease. When this
happens, it can lose its shape and/or tear. Second,
the exposed dough will start to dry out, which will
cause it to bake very poorly and leave the surface
like a cracked desert floor. The key is to move
quickly but carefully.
LIGHT, MEDIUM, AND HEAVY
SAUCING
How much sauce should you put on your pizza?
Personal preference can play a role, but there are
also some clear lines about what works best for a
particular kind of pizza. For example, you would
never put the same amount of sauce on a deep-dish
pizza and a Neapolitan pizza. Large amounts of
sauce can result in a wet, soggy crust. Too much
sauce also means the toppings won't cling, so they'll
slide off when you pick up a slice. Even if you fold
the slice to keep the toppings in place, the crust will
be wet, gummy, and unpleasant to eat. Sauce doesn't
get a lot of attention, but it plays such a crucial
role in adding flavor and moisture, we're not sure
why more pizzaioli don't devote the care to making
it the best possible.
Light saucing Medium saucing Heavy saucing
EXPERIMENT
WHICH GOES FIRST: CHEESE OR SAUCE?
For many types of pizzas, including Neapolitan and New York, the sauce
goes on first, followed by the cheese. While Trenton tomato pie is characterized by the sauce on top (see page 1:104), artisan pizzas made by
many makers also reverse the order. This has gotten a lot of attention as
an innovation. Franco Pepe's "mistaken margherita" is an example, but
for almost any pizza the order of sauce and cheese could go either way.
Adding the cheese first reduces the chance of a gel layer (see page
1:370), and topping adhesion is better. One of the challenges with a
Neapolitan margherita pizza is that the cheese can have a mind of its
own. It frequently slides off, especially when paired with a soupy sauce.
We wondered whether adding the ingredients in reverse order-that
is, placing the pieces of cheese on the dough before the sauce-would
help anchor the toppings. It took us slightly longer to distribute the
sauce around the cheese and protect the basil under the sauce, but the
pizza tasted as good as our master recipe and we avoided the dreaded
cheese-slide.
We also tried making New York pizzas by distributing the shredded
cheese first and the sauce second. This time, we didn't like the results.
It was challenging to spread the sauce evenly on top of the shredded
cheese. Also, it didn't melt cohesively, which negatively affected the
texture. We tried another idea, mixing the cheese and sauce together
and then spreading the mixture on the dough. Not only did it fail to
improve the melt, it resulted in an unappetizing pink color.
If you're using sliced cheese, as for Trenton tomato pies, adding the
cheese before the sauce works well. Adding sliced cheese first also
makes it easy to distribute the sauce on the thinnest possible pizzas (see
page 3:13). Alternatively, sauce can be applied in even drops around the
pizza with no spreading.
Reversing the order of ingredients could be done for almost any pizza. Detroit-style and deepdish are traditionally sauced after baking (the same applies to focaccia when you are using it as
a pizza base).
SAUCE 207
8
SAUCE AMOUNT RECOMMENDATIONS
The following table shows the interplay between the amounts of dough
and sauce, as well as baking time and temperature, for different kinds
of pizza. Although we are providing recommended sauce weights,
these are also assuming a certain water contentfor the sauce appropriate for the style and aren't necessarily interchangeable. Keep in mind
that this information is for a single pizza, and the size of the dough and
sauce-able diameter is important. For example, it might appear that the
Brazilian thin-crust pizza has a lot of sauce when compared to the weight
of the dough, but the dough is rolled out very thin to make a large pizza.
Baking times can vary depending on how many pizzas you're baking.
Focaccia is included because it can make for a great pizza foundation
even though we don't classify it as pizza. The New York square pizza
dough is parbaked before applying sauce and cheese. For Detroit-style
pizza, the sauce is heated separately and appliedafter baking.
Pizza style Dough weight Dough size Sauce weight Sauce area Baking temperature Baking time
Thin-Crust Pizza 275 g 40 cm/16 in 95 g 38 cm/15 in 285°C/550° F 5 min
see page 11O 370 g 50 cm/20 in 170 g 48 cm/19 in
Brazilian Thin- 125 g 23 cm/9 in 100 g 21 cm/8 in 285°C/550°F 5 min
Crust Pizza 250 g 40 cm/16 in 160 g 38 cm/15 in
see page 114
Deep-Dish Pizza 230 g 21 cm by 5 cm/ 180 g 21 cm by 5 cm/ 250°C/485° F 27 min
see page 118 81½ by 2 in 8½ by 2 in
700 g 32 cm by 5 cm/
121/½ by 2 in
445 g 32 cm by 5 cm/
121½ by 2 in
Neapolitan Pizza 250 g 30 cm/12 in 120 g 25 cm/10 in 425-480°C/800-900°F 1-11½ min
see page 124
New York Pizza 400 g 35 cm/14 in 160 g
33 cm/13 in 315°C/600° F 4-5 min
see page 132 600 g 40 cm/16 in 240 g
38 cm/15 in
800 g 45 cm/18 in 320 g 43 cm/17 in
1 kg 50 cm/20 in 400 g 48 cm/19 in
1.1 kg 55 cm/22 in 440 g
53 cm/21 in
1.2 kg 60 cm/24 in 480 g 58 cm/23 in
Artisan Pizza 360 g 35 cm/14 in 145 g 33 cm/13 in 285°C/550° F 6-7 min
see page 142 400 g 40 cm/16 in 215 g 38 cm/15 in
470 g
45 cm/18 in 290 g
43 cm/17 in
500 g 50 cm/20 in 360 g 48 cm/19 in
580 g 55 cm/22 in 400 g
53 cm/21 in
620 g 60 cm/24 in 435 g 58 cm/23 in
Focaccia 1 kg 46 cm by 33 cm / 350 g
see page 148 18 in by 13 in
46 cm by 33 cm/
18 in by 13 in
245°C/475° F 12-15 min
New York Square 500 g 46 cm by 33 cm/ 225 g 46 cm by 33 cm/ 285°C/550°F 27 min
Pizza 18 in by13 in 18 in by 13 in
see page 152
Al Taglio Pizza
see page 158
700 g 60 cm by 20 cm/
24 in by 8 in
200 g 58 cm by 18 cm / 315° C/600°F 11 min
23 in by 7 in
1.4 kg 60 cm by 40 cm/
24 in by 16 in
400 g 58 cm by 38 cm/
23 in by 15 in
Detroit-Style Pizza 330 g 25 cm by 20 cm/ 75 g
n/a 275°C/525° F 15 min
see page 166 10 in by 8 in
500 g 35 cm by 25 cm/ 150 g n/a
14 in by 10 in
208
COMMON SAUCE PROBLEMS
Proper saucing can take practice. So can getting the right sauce consistency. On your road to pizza sauce perfection, a number of things can go
wrong. The goal is trying to prevent these things from happening in the
first place because once the sauce is on the pizza, mistakes get harder
to fix. After the pizza is in the oven, it's practically impossible. In general,
Problem
The tomato sauce is leaching water.
There is too much sauce.
You see char marks in the sauce after you pull
the pizza out of the oven. The sauce is burnt.
Solution
err on the side of less sauce. Sauce is a very wet thing you're putting on
top of the dough and can lead to serious quality problems, such as a gel
layer, or gum line (see page 1:370). Saucing your pizza and letting it sit for
a long time before baking can also contribute to a more pronounced
gum line.
Add 0.1% xanthan gum to the sauce.
It's not ideal, but you can use an offset spatula
to lift up and move the sauce from the areas
that look oversauced. Remember, the longer
the dough disc sits, the greater chance it will
stick to the work surface, so work quickly.
You can't fix burnt sauce, but you can learn
from it. There are a few reasons why this happens. You may not have put enough sauce on
the dough, or the water content of the sauce
may have been too low. Try a different sauce
with a higher water content.
Notes
This happens mostly with the more fluid
and simpler tomato sauce recipes, such as
Neapolitan pizza tomato sauce, but we have also
seen it with thicker sauces. The effect of this is
that it can create a wet place where the sauce
meets the rim crust, making it soggy.
You don't want to cover the whole surface of the
dough with sauce. There should be some parts
where the sauce is applied thinly enough that
you can see the dough through it. The bottom
line is, if you don't see dough at all, you overdid
it. For exact amounts, consult each recipe.
Ifthe sauce has burnt spots and the crust is too
dark, it means the pizza was simply overbaked.
When this happens, you don't need to change
the sauce. Just reduce the baking time or temperature for the next pizza.
Leaching water Too much sauce
Char marks
SAUCE
The term "gel layer" (sometimes called the gum line) refers to a wet, gummy surface just
beneath the sauce on a baked pizza. It almost looks like the dough wasn't fully baked. The
real problem is that the dough wasn't able to evaporate off enough moisture during baking, a
problem that's tied to the fact that it's covered with a wet sauce. We go into more detail about
the gel layer on page 1:370.
209
8
For more on the history of tomatoes, see
page 210.
This photo taken in Indianapolis, Indiana, in
1908 shows young boys unloading canned
tomatoes from a freight car.
TOMATO SAUCES
If you're looking for the most popular sauce for
pizza, tomato-based sauce wins, hands down. For
many, it's not pizza unless there's tomato saucе.
There are many kinds of tomatoes used in sauce,
in many different forms, ranging from fresh to
preserved and canned, but most all tomato sauce is
made from canned tomatoes. What we call tomato
sauce can mean a preseasoned sauce straight from
the can, canned tomatoes that you minimally crush
(what most pizzaioli do), or a cooked sauce made
from canned tomatoes. In the case of marinara
pizza, we recommend making the sauce so you have
the right ratio of water (see page 222). But in most
cases, it's really up to you to decide on the right
sauce. Do you want the pure tomato taste, or do you
want to add seasoning and flavors?
In most countries, fresh tomatoes are available
year-round, but just because they're available doesn't
mean they're good. There's little question that
in-season (mid- to late-summer) tomatoes ripened
to full red-ripe under the hot sun taste the best,
but in most parts of the world canned tomatoes
are going to taste better than fresh ones. This runs
counter to the belief that has existed through the last
part of the 20th century up to nowthat favors using
the best ingredients and using them fresh. That's not
say to you can't make an excellent sauce from fresh
tomatoes, but that requires really great tomatoes
and really knowing what you're doing. It's for this
reason that only a small amount of pizzas contain
some form of fresh tomatoes and even then they are
often treated as a topping. Most canned tomatoes
are processed and put into a can just hours after
they're picked, and canneries work 24/7 through
the late-summer harvest season to get it all done.
Thanks to this quick postharvest processing, canned
tomatoes are an excellent option.
For many pizza makers, opening a can is indeed
the go-to first step. For some, it's a can of premade
pizza sauce. For others, it may involve hand-crushing
canned tomatoes or pureeing and seasoning them
to make a sauce. Because canned tomatoes are
cooked during the canning process (see page 217),
these sauces generally aren't cooked again. Canned
A BRIEF TIMELINE OF
THE TOMATO
Europeans once considered the tomato
to be poisonous, probably because it's
a member of the nightshade family (see
page 216). Nonetheless, the tomato has
been an important part of culinary history, not just in pizza but also in cuisines
around the globe (for more on where it
originated, see page 1:9). This list highlights some of the points in time when
tomatoes made the biggest impact, but
it's by no means exhaustive.
1519
The Spanish encountered tomato
cultivation in the southern part of Mexico.
The Aztecs named the plant xitomatl. Its
wild ancestor is believed to have been
cultivated and consumed since 500 вВСЕ.
1597
John Gerard reported that "love
apples" (tomatoes) were eaten in
boiled form along with "pepper,
salt. and oile" as a sauce.
Lo Scalco alle Moderne
Salfadi Pomadoro, alla Spagnola.
icrai una mezza dozzena di Pomadoro
ature; le porrai fopra le brage, ibruftól
ie faranno abbrufcate, gli leverai la-fcorza
ente,ede tritcrai ninutamente con il Colk
iungerai Cipolle tritate minute, à difcreti
lo puse tritato minuto, Sespello, Piper
untità, a mefcolando ogni cofainfientj
oderai con an pò di Sale, Oglio, &e Acotu
1694
In Lo Scalco alla Moderna, there is a
mention of tomatoes used to make
Spanish sauce.
TURNER HYBRID
TOMATO.
Ethylene Treatment of Tomatoes
E. P. Kobman
1835
A New York farmers' magazine wrote about cooking
tomatoes, including using
them as a sauce.
1848
Harrison Woodhull Crosby
was one of the first to can
tomatoes industrially.
1868
By 1870 tomatoes were among the big three canned
vegetables. By 1879 more than 19 million cans of
tomatoes were manufactured annually, and within a
few years the production quadrupled.
1931
E. F. Kohman observed that if "gassed with ethylene,
tomatoes could be picked before they were fully
ripened" and could withstand handling better. Ripe
fruits of many varieties emit ethylene gas to signal
ripening. The upshot is that canned tomatoes are more
likely to be picked ripe than fresh tomatoes you'd find
in the grocery store, which are picked green and then
shipped.
tomatoes have a distinct taste since temperature
alters the tomato flavor.
With so many different kinds of processed tomato
products, choosing can be a project in itself. Here
we streamline your options, but ultimately it comes
down to which flavor profile you like the best. In
general, we prefer the naturally sweeter tomato products (no sugar added) with high acidity. Acidity can
be natural or enhanced with citric acid. The acidity
is measured by pH. The lower the pH number, the
more acidic the product. We like a pH between 4.1
and 4.6. There are many ways to measure pH, but
we prefer to use a spear-tip waterproof pH meter
(see page 292). We measure sweetness by degrees
Brix. This measurement tells you the concentration
of dissolved sugar per 100 g of any given liquid, and
it's measured with a refractometer. In tomatoes,
the dissolved solids are mostly sugars, but also
include acids and soluble pectins. The higher the
Brix degrees, the sweeter the liquid. We look for
something between 7 and 8.5 degrees Brix in our
canned tomato products.
What we would call an heirloom tomato today is clearly visible in Raphaelle Peale's still life from 1823.
1704
PANVNTO
TOSÇANO
DFrangese Couden
Ler uselel mge d
Francesco Gaudentio's recipe collection Il Panuto toscano indicates that
the tomato was becoming more widely
eaten in Italy and were said to be
"cultivated in gardens."
1758
Hannah Glasse's The Art of Cookery included a
recipe using tomatoes.
1770
Harriott Pinckney Horry copied a
collection of recipes, including one
titled "To Keep Tomatoes for Winter
Use,"which gave some of the earliest
preservation instruction for tomatoes.
AND IMPORTANT DISCOVERY.
TOMATO PILLS,
TENTIRELY VERCTAR
IMPURITIER OF TIHE LOOD
1830s
American views toward tomatoes
changed when John Cook Bennett and
Archibald Miles investigated the health
benefits of tomatoes.
CLAUDIA BRA
TOMATO
NORTHRUP KING SEED
EW
Qualita Finissima
SALSA POMIDORO
1945-50
Tomato paste began to gain in popularity as an industrial ingredient.
1960s
The mechanical tomato harvester and
suitable varieties were developed by
Dr. C. Lorenzen and Dr. J. Hanna at
the University of California, Davis.
77%
LATE 1980s
Growers transition to hybrid
tomato seed varieties with
improved yields, disease
resistance, and better processing
characteristics.
2010
John ("Jay") Warner Scott
developed the Tasti-Lee fresh
market tomato.
8
THE ANATOMY OF A ТОМАТO
Botanically speaking, a tomato is a berry consisting of seeds within a
fleshy pericarp developed from an ovary. It's technically a fruit, but gastronomically it's treated as a vegetable.
Beefsteak tomatoes, which are soft and large, with lots of locular
material, are an example of fresh market tomatoes. The heirloom variety
Roma, with its oval or plum shape, is an early processing-type tomato.
Over the years "roma" has become a generic name for plum-shaped
tomatoes that are for either fresh market or processing. The true Roma
variety is rarely grown.
There are a lot of processing varieties for canning. The processing varieties are better for cooking than those used in the fresh market because
they can hold up to the heat and still retain firmness. Processing tomatoes
are very firm and have been bred to be harvested red-ripe. They often contain less water and have higher levels of pectins and fiber, which is desired
in pastes or purees. Thick flesh and less locular gel is important when the
fruit are expected to be peeled or diced.
Seed companies and some tomato processors have developed their
own varieties of tomatoes that you can't buy fresh. These are marketed
to large growers, and rather than colorful names like Green Zebra or
Brandywine (heirloom fresh market varieties you'd find at your local
farmers' market), they're given less whimsical names, like Heinz 5608 or
Woodbridge BQ 273. Every year the Processing Tomato Advisory Board
generates a list of all the varieties of processing tomatoes harvested in
California, and reports their quality attributes for that season. Other
tomato-growing states, such as Ohio, Indiana, and Pennsylvania, will use
tomato varieties that are more resistant to mold due to the fact that it
rains during the growing season in those states.
PEDICEL
The pedicel is the stem
that attaches the flower
to the main plant.
COLUMELLA
The columella goes down
the center of the tomato.
The "spokes"that appear to
radiate from the columella are
the septa.
SEEDS
The seeds have a seed coat
to protect them. They are
found near the placental
tissue, which is connected
to the columella.
PARENCHYMA
The tomato seeds are
encased in a jelly-like sac
called the parenchyma,
which is located in the
locular cavity and has a
lot of flavor.
PERICARP
Just underneath the
tomato skin is the pericarp, the bulk of which
is the mesocarp and
constitutes the flesh of
the tomato. The thickness
of the tomato flesh varies
depending on the variety.
PEEL
The outside of the tomato
is encased in the epidermis,
or peel. The tomato's peel
should typically be removed
before making sauce.
212
THE FETISH SURROUNDING SAN MARZANO ТОМАTOES
Šan Marzano is a variety of tomato that's grown in the Campania region
of Italy, in the volcanic soil around Mount Vesuvius, under exacting
conditions. There are regulations around every step of the process, from
the sourcing of the seeds to the way they're harvested by hand, not by
machine. Only those tomatoes that meet all the requirements can get the
coveted label "DOP" (Denominazione d'Origine Protetta) on the can.
All that coddling on the farm doesn't come cheap, of course, but
many are willing to pay a higher price to get the real deal. The DOP San
Marzanos are beloved by a great number of pizzaioli in Naples, as well
as other parts of the world. Not everyone realizes, however, that not all
tomatoes labeled "San Marzano" are actually grown to the DOP standards. The Campania growing area is quite small (about 60 square miles),
and as we said, San Marzano is a variety of tomato, and it's grown in a
number of places around the world. Manufacturers know there's a fetish
surrounding San Marzanos, so having that name on the label is a selling
point. Further complicating matters, it's legal to say something was "produced in Italy" even if it was grown elsewhere; the only requirement is
that the foreign-grown tomatoes were turned into a canned product on
Italian soil. You have a variety name and you have a geographic monopoly on a trademark.
Villa literno
Aversa San Felice
Giugliano
in Campania
Marigliano
Avellino
Quarto
Napoli
Torre del
Gius Mrato San
Unless you've met all the DOP standards, you can't label your
tomatoes as DOP San Marzano. But it's legal outside of Italy to call your
tomatoes plain old San Marzano if that's what they are.This makes the
whole enterprise ripe for confusion or even fraud. In fact, the head of the
DOP San Marzano governing body has said that 95 percent of tomatoes
labeled "San Marzano" in the United States are grown elsewhere and
don't meet the DOP standards. Fraudulently labeled pizzas and tomatoes
have been seized by police.
In 2019, two federal lawsuits accused a major producer of labeling
their cans ini a way that made consumers think they were buying the
high-end DOP product when they were actually buying something else.
The plaintiffs say DNA tests prove their claims.The cans say "certified"
and "San Marzano," but they do not include any reference to DOP. The
company denied any wrongdoing, and the lawsuit continues to play out.
Some serious pizza makers frown on non-DOP San Marzanos, but we
don't have a hard-and-fast rule like that. We've tasted some very good
San Marzanos that lack the DOP seal. (Of course, we've also tasted some
that aren't very good.) Here's another shocker: you can make a good
pizza with other tomato varieties! There are so many kinds of tomatoes,
it's shortsighted to think there's only one kind that works.
The San Marzano tomato was commercially introduced in 1926, and it's
popular because of its flavor and also
because its firm flesh retains its shape
in the can and its peel is easily removed.
Amy Goldman, author of The Heirloom Tomato, has called it "the most
important industrial tomato of the
20th century."
When you see the DOP seal on a
food item (see below), it means it was
grown in a carefully delineated region,
following very particular rules. Products
can be granted DOP status, meaning
Denominazione d'Origine Protetta, by
the European Union, and it's a way to
protect the product's integrity. You'll
see the seal on certain cheeses, olive
oils, prosciutto, and, yes, San Marzano
tomatoes. For tomatoes, the label will
say, "Pomodoro S. Marzano Dell'Agro
Sarnese-Nocerino" and include the red
and yellow DOP seal, as well as another
seal depicting the tomatoes. If it doesn't
have the seals, the tomatoes aren't DOP
San Marzanos.
S MARZANO DELL'AGRO SAD
POMODORO
ONTO
ERIN
ONED'ORIGIA LION
Cava de
Salerno
Ravello Pontecagnaпо
Bellizz Ebol
Battipaglia
SAUCE
The region where DOP San Marzano tomatoes are
officially allowed to grow is far too small to keep up with
global demand. This, coupled with convoluted labeling
laws, has led to consumers questions about what they are
really getting when they buy this coveted product.
213
8
CANNED TOMATOES
Canned tomatoes come in a variety of textures from
whole to paste and everything in between. How
those tomatoes are harvested matters. Obviously,
the more tomatoes you can harvest, the more you
can sell, so most harvesting is done with machines.
Because machines aren't exactly gentle, tomato
varieties have been developed to be sturdier,
with a thicker pericarp (see page 212), so they're
more resistant to bruising. This is not without
consequences. The thicker the flesh, the fewer seeds
a tomato will have, and the seeds, along with the
jelly-like membrane that envelops the seeds (called
the parenchyma), are where the flavor resides.
While tomatoes for fresh market are handpicked,
they are often harvested green or with a blush
of orange (vine-ripened). Processing tomatoes,
whether picked by machine or by hand (still
common in some countries), are harvested at the
red-ripe stage, which allows full development of the
tomato's flavor compounds. Some canners adjust for
flavor by adding sugar, citric acid, and/or salt to their
products, and these are legitimate practices, though
we prefer products that don't have these additions.
Generally, canned tomato products have their
peel removed before reaching the can. Exceptions
would be certain ground products and very small
varieties such as Piennolo; smaller tomatoes aren't
peeled because they would lose too much yield.
Large pieces of tomato skin tend to take on a very
firm, almost plastic-like texture when they're
canned. If you do get the occasional tomato peel in a
whole canned tomato product, simply remove it.
Whole peeled, diced, and crushed tomato products are peeled while the tomato is still whole. Peeling isn't easy-for individuals or for manufacturers.
There are two ways to do it: using a lye solution or
steaming for several seconds followed quickly by a
drop in pressure. In California, about 70% of peeled
tomatoes are steamed and 30% are lye-peeled. Lye
peeling is more efficient at removing peels with less
pericarp (flesh) loss, meaning the yields are higher
and the red color just below the skin is retained. The
environmental concerns oflye disposal, however, are
important to consider. Both methods involve passing
the tomatoes over rubber discs or pinch rollers
that mechanically remove the peel before they are
canned and cooked to sterilize them.
For home cooks and restaurant kitchens, the
simplest way to remove the peels is to drop tomatoes
in boiling water for a few seconds, shock them in an
ice bath, and then manually peel them. This is also
known as tomatoes concasse; we detail the method
on page 226.
Tomatoes used in purees, sauces, and pastes are
typically not peeled whole. Instead the tomatoes
are heated, chopped, and the pulp is passed through
screens to remove the seeds and fragments of peel.
Much as with a food mill, the screen size used is determined by the desired texture of the final product.
Canned tomatoes can come in a variety of formats.
Different types of products are made with different
kinds of tomatoes. For tomato paste, you want varieties with lots of fiber and solids so that less energy is
used to evaporate the moisture. For whole, diced, and
crushed tomatoes, the varieties need to be easy to peel
with very firm and thick pericarps. Because the heat of
canning can break down softer varieties of tomatoes
and turn them into mushy paste, some canners add a
salt called calcium chloride to firm the flesh and help
retain the shape. We consider this to be a valid manufacturing practice, but within limits. When too much
calcium chloride is added, the flavor is affected and
the tomatoes can take on an unnatural texture, similar
to a wet sponge. The tomato products on the next few
pages are often used for pizza sauce.
We were fortunate enough to visit the Ciao
tomato factory and fields for their annual San
Marzano tomato harvest (see photos above
and below). We were also able to observe
the fascinating sorting and processing of the
tomatoes (see photo on previous page). Some
claim that these prized tomatoes are the
secret ingredient for making the best pizzas
(see page 213).
Phrases like "packed fresh in season"
refer to tomatoes that are cooked only
one time and go directly into their final
can. Because the tomato season is fairly
short, some processors package the
tomatoes in bulk during season, and
then repack them into cans later. This
results in two cooking processes and
can affect the quality ofthe product.
Canned tomato products are generally
red, but tomatoes also come in yellow,
green, deep purple, and even a combination of colors. Red tomatoes get their
color thanks to a carotenoid called lycopene. The more lycopene, the redder the
tomato. Tomato color is measured with
instruments called tristimulus colorimeters and spectrophotometers.
SAUCE 215
8
Canned whole tomatoes
We came across many pizza makers
who said they used fresh tomato sauce
when they actually were using canned
tomatoes. It seemed that they thought
that if they didn't cook them, they
weren't cooked. But canned tomatoes
are, in fact, cooked during the canning
process. Heat kills microbes and preserves the tomatoes.
Canned Whole Tomatoes
Most pizzaioli use canned whole tomatoes-specifically San Marzano tomatoes (see page 213)—rather
than fresh tomatoes. Even Neapolitan pizzaioli, who
are sticklers for fresh ingredients, use canned. Given
the stigma around canned foods, it might seem
counterintuitive that professional pizzaioli make this
choice, but there are some good reasons for this.
Consistency is the big one. Because tomatoes
are picked close to their peak and promptly canned,
you get a consistent product whether you open the
can tomorrow or months from now. Of course, not
all canned tomatoes are created equal. It is fair to
say that once you find the right canned tomato for
your taste, you're probably going to stick with it for
a while.
You can't look at a can and see how the tomatoes
were ripened, but researchers say that canning
tomatoes are best when they are picked at 85%-95%
ripeness (rather than being ripened off the vine).
Indeed, some researchers have found that the
tomatoes' stage of maturity is actually more important than the variety's genetic makeup. Immature
tomatoes often have lower pH, higher acid, and
lower sugars, and make a thicker juice. As tomatoes
become overripe, the pH rises and the viscosity
becomes thinner. Some canners carefully measure
the growing tomatoes' pH, waiting until it hits
4.1-4.5 before they harvest. Most canners, however,
add citric acid as a precaution. Lowering the pH is
mainly for microbial concerns. The pH needs to be
controlled, especially for diced or peeled tomatoes,
since they have higher water activity, which creates
an environment that can foster microbial growth.
Tomatoes provide flavor for the sauce, of course,
but they also add texture. The amount of water in
the can is such that when you process thewhole
peeled tomatoes with their liquid, you should wind
up with a sauce that has just the right consistency.
Better-quality canned tomatoes have a balance of
sweetness and acidity. The sweetness should be
natural (the higher the Brix, the better), and the
acidity can be natural or come from citric acid.
Tomato sauce needs salt, but not all manufacturers
add it, and that's just fine as it's easy to add yourself.
When using unsalted canned tomatoes, we recommend adding about 1% of the total weight of the
can's contents for proper seasoning. If it's a brand
you've never used before, always taste before adding
anything or using it on a pizza.
We like canned DOP San Marzano tomatoes,
but other varieties are also very good. In the United
States, most canned tomatoes are plum tomatoes,
and some producers make a very high-quality
ARE NIGHTSHADES REALLY BAD FOR YOU?
The fear that tomatoes are poisonous was one of the things that stymied
people in Europe from eating them for hundreds of years (see page 1:9).
It surprises most people to know that what is now Italy, which wasn't one
country until hundreds of years after the tomato arrived from the New
World, was among the last parts of Europe to accept the tomato as food.
There's been a flurry of press in the last few years about vegetables
and fruits in the botanical family Solanaceae, commonly known as nightshades. Some argue that ingesting these plants can cause inflammation.
The botanical family includes peppers, potatoes, eggplants, and tomatoes-which puts them smack dab in Modernist Pizza territory. Could this
innocuous-seeming produce actually be harmful?
We searched the scientific literature and couldn't find any solid
research proving a connection between nightshades and inflammation.
So where did this idea come from? Perhaps it's because nightshades contain alkaloids, a group of chemical compounds that can be toxic in large
doses. The botanical family also includes tobacco, which has obvious
problems, and belladonna, a plant that numerous studies have found to
be harmful beyond very small doses.
The idea that nightshades are bad for our health is being promoted
by celebrities and book authors, which has brought it to the forefront.
It's also popular among some communities that are highly attuned to
the idea of inflammation, such as people with arthritis, inflammatory
bowel disease, or psoriasis. There are many anecdotal stories about
how eliminating nightshades or other foods has helped some people
combat symptoms.
Certainly, medical studies confirm the connection between inflammation (as measured by a blood test for C-reactive protein) and chronic
disease, and what we eat plays into all of that. But for most of us, the
nutritional benefit of a varied diet, which includes all kinds of fruits and
vegetables, is probably the best bet.
Members of the nightshade family, including theeggplant, peppers, potatoes, and tomatoes
shown above, are sometimes portrayed unflatteringly when it comes to your daily diet, but the
scientific evidence isn't concrete enough to back up this claim.
216 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THE TOМАТО CANNING PROCESS
The purpose of canning tomatoes is, of course, to preserve them.
Temperature and time are crucial to the preservation process. The
tomatoes need to be heated to a high-enough temperature that microorganisms are killed, making the product shelfstable. Temperature also
has a dramatic impact on the flavor, color, and texture of the product, so
processors monitor it closely throughout the entire process. When canning tomato sauces and paste, there are two distinct processes for concentrating tomatoes based upon their initial heating temperature: cold
break processing (CBP) and hot break processing (HBP). Even when the
processes use the same raw fruit, they result in very different products.
In CBP, the tomatoes are chopped and initially heated in the can
to between 71° C and 77°C/160° F and 170°F. This temperature is low
enough that the tomatoes retain some of theirfresh flavor and a brighter
red color. Certain enzymes (namely polygalacturonase and pectin
methylesterase) remain active to break down natural pectins, which
results in a thinner viscosity product. Higher temperatures are applied
later in the process for concentration and food safety. These kinds of
tomatoes work well for Neapolitan pizza, which is aiming for that fresh
tomato flavor.
In HBP, the tomatoes are heated even further, to at least 91° C/195° F
as quickly as possible. At these temperatures the enzymes are killed off
almost immediately, leaving the pulp with more large-sized pectins. The
result is a product that's thicker than CBP tomatoes, but also deeper red
with a cooked-tomato color and flavor. Because the tomatoes break
down a little bit in the heat, the liquid in the can gets pulpy and red. This
is the most common kind of tomato product you'll find, and it works for
many applications. In both processes, the cans are quickly cooled down
to prevent overcooking.
WASH MACHINE SORT HAND SORT
COOK ADD FLAVORS QUALITY CONTROL CAN
DISTRIBUTE
SAUCE 217
8
218
Diced tomatoes
Crushed tomatoes
product. In Italy, you'll find other fantastic canned
tomatoes, including Piennolo and Corbarino tomatoes. Both are small varieties that deliver a lot of
flavor. Because they're so small, they're not peeled
before canning. Normally, skins are off-putting
in pizza sauce, but with these tomatoes, we don't
mind it. Their skins are thinner than the skins of
San Marzano and most other processing tomatoes
and generally don't develop the tough texture
we find unpleasant. If you can find these canned
tomatoes, try leaving the skins on and see what you
think. If you don't like it, simply pass the tomatoes
through a food mill to remove the skins.
The main thing to remember is that tomatoes
don't have to come from the foothills of Vesuvius to
taste good. We sampled a number of canned tomatoes during our travels and found many we liked. See
page 220 for our recommendations.
Diced Tomatoes
Size-wise, diced tomatoes are the next step down
from whole tomatoes. Because the tomato pieces
are small, they're likely to cook and break down
more easily than whole canned tomatoes. To keep
that diced shape, they're often canned in tomato
juice that's been mixed with calcium chloride.
The whole point of using diced tomatoes is to see
the dice. If you don't care about the shape, use
crushed tomatoes.
Crushed or Ground Tomatoes
Whole peeled tomatoes are turned into crushed
tomatoes with a machine called a Rietz Disintegrator. It breaks them down into a coarse puree that
retains some chunks and also includes the seeds.
For certain ground products, unpeeled tomatoes
are used to provide a distinct texture. Some pizzaioli
don't process crushed tomatoes any further or make
them smoother because they feel that the sauce
tastes bitter as a result of pureeing the seeds. We
can't discern a difference but encourage you to try
both methods to see what you like. You can just stir
the crushed tomatoes into another tomato sauce
if you'd prefer. Some brands of crushed tomatoes
are slightly chunkier than others. You'll see both
"crushed" and "ground" on the labels for these tomatoes, but they are functionally the same thing.
Tomato Puree
Most tomato purees are made by cooking the
unpeeled tomatoes and then straining them to
remove the peels and seeds. After that, they're
canned, which means they're cooked further.
This makes it a completely different product from
crushed tomatoes, but not necessarily worse or
better. Tomato puree is useful in a number of
applications, including preparations that require
long cooking and those where the fresh tomato
taste doesn't matter so much. Manufacturers make a
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Ciao
e Pomadorodi ra
Italian Peeled tomatoe
SCLAFAN
TOMATO PUREE
DICED
ITALIAN
Carmelina
Uta Cucina
Homi
Pom
CHOPPED TOMАТО
PLUM TOMATО ERDOLCE Gustarosso
TOMATOES
BIANCO
adaro S.Ma
HANCO PICED
TOMATOES
DINAPOUП
CENTO
SAN MARZANO
CERTIFIED RELED TOMATОЕ
UCE GLEN
There's a large variety of canned tomato
products available and they produce different
sauce consistencies and flavors. Pizza makers
often combine different canned products to
achieve their desired pizza sauce. We've got
an in-depth table of ways to customize your
tomato sauce on page 232.
DINAPOLI
product called "pizza sauce," which is very similar to
tomato puree but is passed through a larger finishing
screen that allows some of the seeds to pass through.
Many pizza makers use this sauce and add their own
ingredients to customize it. Pizza sauce is typically
between 8 and 14 Brix.
Tomato Paste
Tomato paste is a fantastic way to add very concentrated tomato taste and umami to any tomato
preparation. To make tomato paste, the seeds and
skins are filtered out and the pulp is juiced. The juice
is then evaporated until it forms a paste, which can
take some time. All that evaporation means it's a
highly concentrated final product, but you need only
a little bit to have an impact on flavor. Even in small
quantities, the paste makes its presence known. By US
law, tomato paste should contain at least 24% soluble
solids, which is a 4- to 6-fold concentration from the
raw tomatoes. When concentrated even further-to
33% or more-it's called, you guessed it, "double
concentrated tomato paste." Salt is often added.
Tomato Sauce
Canned tomato sauce is a good alternative if you
don't have time to make your own. There are
hundreds of brands available; all you need to do is
find the right one for you. Canned tomato sauce
is generally thick, so it's suitable for most pizzas
except Neapolitan. When you put a thick sauce on a
Neapolitan pizza and bake it in a very hot oven, the
sauce can burn.
Frequently, tomato sauces are pureed until
smooth and may contain other ingredients, such as
basil, oregano, garlic, salt, olive oil, vinegar, onion,
and/or sugar. If the tomatoes aren't sweet enough,
sugar may be added. We aren't fond of sugar in
tomato sauce because it doesn't really improve the
flavor and makes it sweeter than it should be. Sugar
not only affects the sweetness of the sauce, but also
the cooking, so it can't be added all at once. About
one-third is added when the sauce starts to boil; this
makes the red color more intense and helps it stay
red throughout the process. The rest is added later;
to do otherwise would lengthen the cooking time
and make the pulp quality deteriorate. The average
sugar content of tomato sauce brands that we tested
is between 5% and 10%. Salt is added toward the end
of the process because it can cause discoloration.
Spices can be added at the start of boiling or before.
Commercial sauces can be made with fresh
tomatoes, or with tomato paste or concentrated
tomato juice, or with both. Those made with fresh
tomatoes cost a bit more, but they're also higher
quality. The process is as follows: concentrated juice
is processed; additional flavors and ingredients are
added; then comes the boiling, straining, and filling
of the cans or jars; and finally the cans are sealed and
pasteurized at 85°C/ 185°F for 45 minutes. Most
sauces must have at least 10% tomato solids.
Tomato paste
In the tomato world, Brix degrees are
an expression of the soluble solids. The
soluble solids in a tomato are mostly
sugars but also include the acids, salts,
and soluble pectins that it contains
(most varieties range from 4.5 to 6
Brix). "Total solids" is another term that
reflects the soluble components, but
this also includes the insoluble fibers
and large pectins that give the juice and
sauce their consistency.
CEPTSAT NGENTRATED
PASATO
ASTE
SAUCE 219
8
OUR FAVORITE CANNED TOMATOES
There is a plethora of canned tomatoes available to professional and
home pizza makers. How do you choose? Flavor should be the primary
consideration, but also keep the texture in mind so that you make the
optimal sauce for your style of pizza. Tomato products can be used in
combination to build up flavor (one pizzaiolo we met uses a combination of six different canned tomato products). For his New York-style
tomato pizza sauce, for example, Tony Gemignani adds Stanislaus
Full-Red pizza sauce to canned crushed tomatoes. The crushed tomatoes
are the focus, but by adding smaller quantities of the ready-made sauce,
he adds flavor. There are plenty of high-quality ready-made canned pizza
sauces available. It is reasonable to use them as a shortcut, especially if
you are short on time orif you utilize a very large volume of sauce and
simply don't have the time.
220
Gustarosso
Pomodoro S.Marzano dell'Agro Sarnese-Nocerino
=DOP.=
LECONSERYE.
donna
Cruginodel 20 Enano
San Marzano
Tomato of Agro Sarnese-Nocerino area DOP
Protected Designation of Origin
BIANCO
AOSU
1
100% ITALIAN
Carmelina
e... San Marzans
OMATES PELADOS
DINAPOLI
25%
Alta Cucina
Stile Naturale
INTERI PELATI
POMODORI A PERA
PESO NETTO 6 LB. 7 OZ. (2.92 kg
ITALIANOS SAN NICOLA DEI MIRI SAN NICOLA DEI MIRI
PESO NETO 2550g (91 OZ)
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
POMODORINT GIALLI
TILLIE LEWIS, THE AMERICAN WOMAN WHO TURNED INTO THE QUEEN OF ITALIAN TOMATOES
MioReшi
In the 1930s, Tillie Lewis was
among the American entrepreneurs who saw potential
in the lowly canned tomato.
She helped bring a product
grown and canned in Italy,
and targeted mainly at the
vegetable-loving Italians
living in the United States,
to a mainstream American
audience. She also knew the
value of a good story. Where
her business savvy ended
and her creative storytelling began is still a matter of
debate. In the many news
articles written about her in
her heyday, the details of her
rags-to-riches life often seem
to change.
One thing is clear: there was nothing Italian about Lewis's background. She was born Myrtle Ehrlich to Jewish parents in Brooklyn in
1901. Nicknamed Tillie, she left high school as a teen to go to work.
Some sources say she worked folding kimonos for $2.50 a week.
Others say she worked at a grocery store. Still others talk about a stint
selling securities on Wall Street. In any case, she met and married Louis
Weisberg, a man in the wholesale grocery business, at a young age.
Though she and Weisberg later divorced, it was her entrée into the
world of tomatoes.
In 1930, the US government placed a hefty tariff on agricultural
imports. By this time, Italian immigrants living in the United States had
helped boost demand for canned tomatoes, which were also beginning
to find a foothold among a homegrown American audience. After a
bankruptcy in 1932, Lewis was looking for opportunity. Traveling to Italy
in 1934, she met with Florindo del Gaizo, son of a cannery owner. With
the family's export business stifled, del Gaizo, too, was looking for opportunity. He sent Lewis back home with bags full of Italian tomato seeds,
and the two founded the Flotill Foods Corporation in 1935, with canneries near the fields of Stockton, California. He put up an 85% share. When
del Gaizo died two years later, Lewis borrowed to become full owner.
It was not an easy road at first. Yields came in lower than expected.
Factory equipment needed upgrading, and Lewis found herself in dire
financial straits again. But eventually, everything clicked. World War II
shifted trade once again, and canned tomato imports were blocked. The
time was ripe for American tomatoes.
Flotill went on to can other California produce, such as asparagus,
and had contracts to supply the US military with C rations. The company
made calculated gambles to offer day care and other perks to attract
workers. To fill wartime labor shortages, Lewis also brought in workers
from Mexico under the bracero program.
In 1948, she married Meyer Lewis, a representative of the American
Federation of Labor, whom she had met (and hired) several years earlier.
In the early 1950s, annual sales were reported to top $20 million. Hailed
as the tomato queen, she changed the name ofthe company to Tillie
Lewis Foods in 1961. In the 1960s, she sold the company to Ogden Foods.
Lewis continued on as president of the company until she retired in 1971;
annual sales that year were reported to top $90 million. She died in 1977,
in Stockton.
Portrait of Tillie Lewis in late 1936. The Flotill Foods cannery in Stockton during the fourth canning season, 1938.
SAUCE 221
8
COMMON CANNED TOMATO SIZES
Many of our tomato sauce recipes are presented in a parametric recipe
with scaling percentages so that you can choose a sauce yield that works
for you. The idea is that you can utilize a whole can to make your tomato
sauce and not have to worry about having leftovers. The table at right
doesn't cover all of the canned tomato products that are available; they
are the ones most commonly used to make tomato sauces for pizza. The
can sizes and weights are also what is typically found in the United States.
Standard can sizes may vary slightly around the world.
Tomato product
Whole peeled
tomatoes
Diced tomatoes
Weight (can size)
400 g/14 oz (#300 can)
800-820 g/28 oz (#2.5 can)
2.89-3 kg/102–106 oz (#10 can)
400 g/14 oz (#300 can)
800-820 g/28 oz (#2.5 can)
2.89-3 kg/102–106 oz (#10 can)
Volume
12/3 cups
33-31/½ cups
12-12/½ cups
12/3 cups
314-313 cups
1134-1214 cups
Crushed or ground 400 g/14 oz (#300 can) 12/3 cups
tomatoes 800-820 g/28 oz (#2.5 can) 31/3-31/2 сups
2.89-3 kg/102-106 oz (#10 can) 12-123 cups
Tomato puree 400 g/14 oz (#300 can) 12/3 cups
800-820 g/28 oz (#2.5 can) 314-313 cups
2.89-3 kg/102-106 oz (#10 can) 111/2-12 cups
Tomato sauce/ 227 g/8 oz 1 cup
pizza sauce* 400 g/14 oz (#300 can) 12/3 cups
800-820 g/28 oz (#2.5 can)
Tomato paste
2.92-3.15 kg/103-111 oz (#10 can)
170 g/6 oz
3-3.15 kg/106–111 oz (#10 can)
*This conversion is notfor thick or super-thick pizza sauce.
31/4-33 cups
1134-1214 cups
2/3 cup
11-111/½ cups
SOLVING THE MARINARA SAUCE DILEMMA
One of the challenges of baking a marinara pizza is that you need to put
on more sauce than you would on a typical pizza, such as a margherita.
The complication occurs during baking because the extra sauce contributes additional moisture, and it's possible that the dough will cook
through but you will still have a soupy sauce at the center of the pizza.
This is why pizzaioli bring the pizza to the front of the oven, where it is
cooler, and spin it around for a few seconds to evaporate that excess
moisture without burning the dough.
In the ideal scenario, the sauce evaporates just enough at the same
time the pizza dough is fully baked. But we have a better solution: simply
make a separate sauce for your marinara pizza. The marinara tomato
sauce should have a lower ratio of water to solids than a margherita
tomato sauce so that there is less moisture to evaporate while the pizza
bakes. The average ratio of water to solids in a can of whole peeled
tomatoes is 2.5 parts water to 1 part solids. This is intentionally done on
the manufacturer's end so that you can just pass the tomatoes through a
food mill and get the right consistency of sauce you need for a margherita pizza. In order to have the right consistency for a marinara sauce, you
need to reduce the ratio of water to solids down to 1.5 parts water to 1
part solids (see page 225 for the recipe). Although it takes more time to
create a separate sauce, the results are well worth it because the sauce
will stay put and not slosh around.
222
Marinara pizza with a soupy center Marinara pizza with a thicker sauce
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
RAW TОМАТOES AND PIZZA
Most tomatoes that wind up on pizza go through some sort of cooking
or heating step. Raw tomatoes can present problems. We all know that if
you slice or dice a tomato and set it aside, it releases a lot of water. It will
leach even more water if you put that cut tomato on a round of dough
and put it in the oven. There just isn't enough time for the water to evaporate during baking, so you'll wind up with a puddle.
One approach we like is to slow-roast fresh tomatoes (see page 231)
to evaporate some of the moisture and concentrate their flavor. But if
you want to use fresh tomatoes, you can pass them through a food mill.
If the resulting sauce is too watery, hang the tomatoes in cheesecloth to
drain the excess water (this is flavorful and can be used for other purposes). Alternatively, you can place slices on the pizza just after it comes
out of the oven. Or, if you want to warm the tomato slices slightly, you
can add them just before the pizza is ready to come out.
For some longer-baking pizzas, you can get away with placing very
thin slices of fresh tomatoes over the cheese. Don't put them on top of
the sauce because it already has its own moisture that needs evaporating. Don't put them directly on the dough, either, because this can cause
a significant gel layer (see page 1:370). And definitely don't try this with
traditional Neapolitan pizza because there's just not enough time for the
water to evaporate during its short bake.
There's a very popular pizza in São Paulo called margherita that
features fresh tomato slices, in addition to the sauce and cheese you
find on the traditional Neapolitan pizza of the same name. It takes just
long enough to bake so that whatever moisture leaches, it won't create a
puddle on the pizza. The key is having really great tomatoes and slicing
them very thin.
SAUCE 223
8
PARAMETRIC RECIPE
TOMATO SAUCE FROM CANNED TОМАТОES
Most pizzaioli around the world make tomato sauce by simply opening
a can (or cans) of tomatoes, processing it, and seasoning the resulting
sauce. There are three basic methods to make canned tomatoes into
tomato sauce: hand-crushing, passing the tomatoes through a food mill,
and using an immersion blender.
Crushing the tomatoes by hand producesa result that straddles the
line between a sauce and a topping.We used gloves to do this, but they
are optional. Food mills have different-size discs forthe tomatoes to pass
through. We recommend one that is not so big that you end up with large
tomato chunks in the sauce nor so small that the seeds are left behind.
Making a sauce with an immersion blender is a method that many use to
save time. The methods outlined below are general instructions. We have
specific notes for each of the sauce recipes in the instructions that follow.
The types of canned tomatoes, proportions, salt, and other flavors
will change depending on the type of sauce you are making. There are
many sizes of canned tomatoes, so you can customize your sauce yield
depending on the size can you use. In general, you want to process the
entire can-don't drain-to make the sauce; you need the exact mix of
tomatoes and water that are in a can. The other ingredients are calculated based on the weight of the main type of tomatoes used. The sauces
in the table on the next page are applied before baking the pizza, with
the exception of the deep-dish pizza tomato sauce.
HOW TO Make Tomato Sauce from Whole Canned Tomatoes
HAND-CRUSHED
3
1
Pour the contents of the can into a bowl or
plastic tub. Add the salt.
2
Crush the tomatoes as finely as you can
using your hands. The sauce will be slightly
chunky.
3 Make sure to remove any skins (sometimes
a few are left behind).
4 Stir in any remaining ingredients.
FOOD MILL
2
1 Place a food millover a bowl or plastic tub.
2 Pour in the contents of the can, and pass it
through the mill.
IMMERSION BLENDER
3 Stir in the salt to dissolve completely. 4 Stir in any remaining ingredients.
1
Pour the contents ofthe can into a bowl or
plastic tub. Add the salt.
2
Puree the ingredients until smooth using
an immersion blender. 3
Stir in any remaining ingredients.
224 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
8
Sauce typе Main canned tomatoes Scaling % Other canned tomatoes Scaling % Other ingredients Scaling %
Thin-Crust/Brazilian ThinCrust Pizza Tomato Sauce
Canned crushed tomatoes 100 Canned tomato sauce 25 Fine salt 1.25
Dried oregano 1
Classic Neapolitan Pizza
Tomato Sauce
Canned whole peeled 100 n/a n/a Fine salt
tomatoes
Marinara Pizza Tomato Sauce Canned whole peeled 100 n/a n/a Fine salt as needed
tomatoes
Quick New York Pizza Tomato
Sauce
Canned crushed tomatoes 100 Canned tomato sauce 33.33 Fine salt 0.33
Dried oregano 0.33
Deep-Dish/Stuffed-Crust/
Detroit-Style Pizza Tomato
Sauce
Canned whole peeled 100
tomatoes
Canned crushed
tomatoes
100 Fine salt 1.5
Canned tomato sauce 66.67 Dried oregano 0.95
Olive oil 2.4
New York Square Pizza
Tomato Sauce
Canned crushed tomatoes 100 Canned whole peeled
tomatoes
46.88 Garlic, minced 1.46
Canned tomato paste 46.88 Fine salt 1.25
Dried oregano 0.42
Basil or tomato leaves, 0.21
torn
Al Taglio Pizza Tomato Sauce Thick tomato puree 100 n/a n/a Fine salt 1
PROCEDURE
THIN-CRUST/ BRAZILIAN THINCRUST PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
Combine the crushed tomatoes, pizza sauce,
salt, and dried oregano and puree until smooth
using an immersion blender. Store for up to 3 d
in refrigeration. Freeze for up to 3 mo. You
can replace the canned tomato sauce with
New York / Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 227), if desired.
CLASSIC NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
TOMATO SAUCE
You can use any of the methods outlined on
the previous page to make the sauce. Store for
up to 4 d in refrigeration. Do not freeze. This
is the thinnest of all the tomato sauces since
you do not drain the canned tomatoes. A drier
sauce would likely burn when it bakes in a 425-
480°C/800-900°F oven. Some pizzaioli add
fresh basil leaves, olive oil, or dried oregano.
MARINARA PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
Drain the liquid from the canned tomatoes but
reserve it. Pass the tomatoes through a food
mill. Put the crushed tomatoes in a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth that has been
placed over a bowl or plastic tub. Drain for
5 h. Collect the drained liquid and add it to
the reserved tomato liquid. Weigh the crushed
tomatoes and multiply theirweight by 1.5. Add
this amount of tomato liquid to the crushed
tomatoes. Stir well. Weigh the sauce and season with 1% fine salt or as needed. Store for up
to 4 d in refrigeration. Do not freeze.
QUICK NEW YORK PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
Use the immersion blender method for this
sauce. Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration.
Freeze for up to 3 mo. This recipe is adapted
from Tony Gemignani.
DEEP-DISH / STUFFED-CRUST/
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
Drain the whole peeled tomatoes. Puree the
drained tomatoes, crushed tomatoes, tomato
sauce, salt, and dried oregano until smooth
using an immersion blender. Stir in the olive
oil. Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 2 mo. This sauce is applied to the
pizza after baking. Warm the sauce over
medium-low heat while the pizza is baking and
then spoon on top of the baked pizza. You can
replace the canned tomato sauce with New
York/Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see page
227), if desired.
NEW YORK SQUARE PIZZA
TOMATO SAUCЕ
Puree the crushed tomatoes, canned whole
peeled tomatoes, tomato paste, garlic, salt, and
dried oregano until smooth using an immersion blender. Stir in the fresh basil or tomato
leaves. Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration.
Freeze for up to 3 mo.
AL TAGLIO PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
Combine the tomato puree with the salt,
and stir well with a whisk to dissolve the salt
completely. Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration.
Freeze for up to 3 mo.
Tomato puree is seedless. Most tomato purees will
work here, but we like the texture and flavor of the
Sclafani brand.
If you are using volume measures, refer to the
table on common can sizes on page 222.
HOW TO Concasse Tomatoes
Tomato concasse is a method commonly used in professional kitchens to
remove the skins from tomatoes. You score the bottom of the tomato in
order to createa place to grab the peel and easily remove it. Some chefs
opt not to score the tomato with an X because you can also peel the
tomato from the core end.
5
1 Cut an X on the bottom of the tomato.
2 Bring a pot of water to a boil and have a
bowl of ice water ready. The ice bath
should contain equal parts ice and water
and be large enough to fitall the tomatoes.
3 Drop the tomatoes carefully into the boiling water and leave in the water for 10 s.
4 Drop them into the ice bath to stop the
cooking.
5 Once cool enough to handle, peel off the
skin.
6 If using large tomatoes, cut them in quarters. For smaller tomatoes, cut them in half.
Removing the seeds is entirely up to you;
we like the seeds in there, so we keep
them.
MODERNIST NEAPOLITAN PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS
Canned whole peeled tomatoes
Fine salt
Xanthan gum
WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
800 g One 28 oz can 100
8 g 11/½ tsp 1
0.5 g 14 tsp + /16 tsp* 0.1
*You can approximate the 6 tsp ofxanthan gum by measuring % tsp and dividing it into two equalparts. Use one
part to make the sauce.
PROCEDURE
Use any ofthe methods outlined on page
224 to combine the tomatoes and salt to
make the sauce base.
2 Place 160 g (½ cup) ofthe sauce in a small
bowl.
3 Sprinkle the xanthan gum slowly over the
sauce while blending with an immersion
blender.
4 Whisk in the rest of the sauce to combine.
Active 5 min/ ~800 g
Inactive 12 h
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
5 Allow to hydrate overnight in refrigeration.
6 Adjust seasoning if necessary.
7 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
The yield on this sauce will use up an entire 800 g (28 oz/#2.5) can of tomatoes. Ifyou are using a 2.89-3 kg
(102-106 oz/#10 can), divide the gram weight of your can of tomatoes by 800 and then multiply that number
by the weight of the other ingredients in the recipe.
Modernist Neapolitan pizza
NEW YORK / ARTISAN PIZZA TОМАТО SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Canned whole peeled or crushed tomatoes 800 g
One 28 oz can 100
White onion, small dice 55 g 13 cup 6.88
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 30-35 min
~500 g
Dried oregano 2g 2 tsp 0.25
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 1.88
Anchovy oil* or canola oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 1.88
Garlic cloves, minced 14 g 2 ea 1.75
Fresh tomato leaves or basil leaves 5g ~7 ea 0.63
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp + s tsp 0.63
MSG**, optional 3.2 g 3/4 tsp 0.4
This sauce has the characteristic canned tomato
flavor that you expect on a classic New York slice.We
recommend using this sauce for New York pizzas as
well as Trenton tomato pies (see page 1:104).
Tomato leaves in small amounts can provide a very
intense tomato taste. Some people believe that
they are poisonous, but we can assure you that they
are not.
*The oil comes from canned anchovies.
**The MSG is optional, but we found the savory notes that it adds workwell for this sauce.
PROCEDURE
1 Pass the tomatoes through a food mill.
2 Sweat the onion and oregano in the olive
and anchovy oil in a medium saucepot over
medium heat until translucent and fragrant,
about 1 min.
3 Add the garlic, and cook, stirring constantly,
until aromatic, about 2 min.
4 Add the tomatoes, tomato or basil leaves,
salt, and MSG.
5
6
Bring to a simmer, then turn the heat down
to low.
Reduce, stirring every few minutes, until the
sauce is thick, about 30 min. The sauce
should bubble ever so slightly on the surface. You should have a little more than half
of what you started with in the pot.
기
8
Adjust the seasoning if necessary. Remove
the tomato or basil leaves. Cool to room
temperature over an ice bath.
Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
MODERNIST NEW YORK/ARTISAN
PIZZA TOMATO SAUCE
If you're in a hurry, you can thicken the sauce with xanthan gum instead
of reducing it. Make the sauce up through step 5 and season it. Once
you have a sauce base that tastes good, place about one-quarter of the
sauce in a small bowl. Sprinkle 0.2% xanthan gum slowly over the sauce
while blending with an immersion blender. Whisk in the rest of the sauce
to combine. Proceed with steps 7 and 8. We recommend allowing the
sauce to hydrate overnight.
AMATRICIANA SAUCE
For step 2 of the New York / Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce, sauté 115 g
chopped guanciale in the olive and anchovy oil in a medium saucepot
until crisp and golden brown, about 4 min. Add 2 g (1½ tsp) red pepper
flakes and 2 g (/½ tsp) ground black pepper. Stir for 10 s. Add the onion
and oregano and sweat until translucent and fragrant, about 1 min.
Continue with the remaining steps in the recipe.
Our umami-rich amatriciana sauce has so much flavor that you don't need to add
much else to the pizza, which is part of why we like it so much. In fact, the sauce
could overwhelm certain toppings if their flavors are nuanced, so we recommend just adding cheese when you are making pizza with this sauce. You can use
chopped pancetta or bacon instead of the guanciale, if desired.
To test the sauce consistency, place a spoonful of sauce on a cool plate.
Allow the sauce to cool, then run your finger through it. The sauce should
hold your finger swipe.
SAUCE 227
8
SPICY TOMATO SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Deep-Dish Pizza Tomato Sauce
see page 225
500 g 2 cups 100
Active 1-2 min ~500 g
Cayenne pepper 2.5 g
Crushed red pepper flakes 0.5 g
1 tsp
14 tsp
0.5
0.1
PROCEDURE
1 Puree the tomato sauce, cayenne, and red
pepper flakes until smooth using an immersion blender.
2 Adjust the seasoning if necessary. 3 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
STRAWBERRY MARINARA SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Frozen strawberries, thawed 450 g 2 cups 100
Canned diced tomatoes 190 g 3/4 cup 42.22
Active 5 min/
Inactive 25-30 min
~500 g
Sweet onion, finely minced 100 g 1/½ cup + 2 Tbsp 22.22
Dry white wine 100 g 13 cup +2 Tbsp 22.22
Garlic, thinly sliced 3g 1 tsp 0.67
Fresh basil leaves, torn 2 g 214 tsp 0.44
This bright-red sauce looks remarkably like marinaraafter all, tomatoes and strawberries are both acidic
red berries. We also recommend using fresh pears or
pressure-cooked quince instead of the strawberries.
Fine salt as needed
PROCEDURE
1 Pulse the strawberries in a food processor
until chunky.
2 Combine the tomatoes, onion, white wine,
garlic, basil, and strawberries in a pot (see
note), and bring to a boil.
3 Reduce the heat to low, and simmer until
thick, 25-30 min.
To test the sauce consistency, place a spoonful of
sauce on a cool plate. Allow the sauce to cool, then
run your finger through it. The sauce should hold
your finger swipe.
4 Season with 1% salt by weight or as needed.
Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
5 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
Note that this sauce will spurt and splatter during
cooking, so it is a good idea to get a pot deeper than
you think will be necessary. Usually we recommend
a pot with 2.5 cm/1 in headspace; for this recipe, we
recommend 7.5 cm/3 in.
This recipe was adapted from Modernist Cuisine
at Home.
SPICY VODKA SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHTТ VOLUME SCALING %
New York/ Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce 425 g 134 cups 100
see page 227 Active 5 min/
Inactive 20-25 min
~500 g
Heavy cream 50 g 31/½ Tbsp 11.76
Vodka 25 g 1 Tbsp +2 tsp 5.88
Cayenne pepper 2.5 g 1 tsp 0.59
Fine salt as needed
PROCEDURE
1 Combine the tomato sauce, cream, and
vodka in a small saucepot, and bring to a
boil, stirring occasionally.
2 Reduce the heat to low, and simmer for 20
min, stirring occasionally.
3 Remove from the heat, and add the cayenne and salt.
5 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
4 Adjust the seasoning if necessary. Cool to
room temperature over an ice bath.
TOMATO AND MUSTARD SAUCE
INSPIRED BY PAPA'S TOMATO PIES
TOTAL TIME YIELD
☑
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Active 1-2 min ~600 g
New York/ Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce 500 g
see page 227
2 cups +1 Tbsp 100
Mustard (Dijon or whole grain)
Fine salt
100 g 1/4 cup + 2 Tbsp 20
as needed
PROCEDURE
1 Whisk the ingredients in a bowl. 2 Adjust the seasoning and mustard amount if
necessary.
3 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
WHITE TOMATO SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Heavy cream 500 g 2 cups +2 Tbsp 200
Canned whole peeled yellow
tomatoes, liquid drained
250 g 2 cups 100
Active 10 min/
Inactive 12 h
~500 g
Garlic clove, thinly sliced 7g 1 ea 2.8
Fresh basil leaves 5g 6-7 ea 2
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp + 1/s tsp 2
This tomato sauce sounds nontraditional, but the
pale-yellow, creamy, slightly acidic sauce ended
up being one of our favorite tomato sauces in the
chapter (though they are all delicious).
1
PROCEDURE
Combine the cream, tomatoes, garlic, basil,
and salt in a vacuum sealable bag.
2 Pull an 80% vacuum.
3 Allow to sit overnight in refrigeration. Storing it longer won't adversely affect it.
4 Transfer the sauce to a fine-mesh sieve
set over a bowl. Do not press the mixture
in the sieve to force the liquid through.
Tap the sieve to get as much liquid to pass
through as possible.
5 If using immediately, leave at room
temperature to temper for up to 3 h.
6 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration.
Do not freeze.
We recommend using this sauce for Neapolitan
pizzas. For a thicker sauce that can be used on New
York or artisan pizza as well as on Neapolitan, use
mascarpone instead of heavy cream. Once you pull
the vacuum, you will need to massage the bag to
make sure all the ingredients combine well. Because
this sauce is thicker, you will not be able to pass it
through a fine-mesh sieve. Use it as is but be sure to
remove the solid ingredients.
SAUCE БАЗА ПРЕМИУ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
229
8
FERMENTED TОМАТО SAUCE
INSPIRED BY SARAH MINNICK
INGREDIENTS
Cherry tomatoes, cut in half
Plum tomatoes, cut into 1.25 cm / 2 in pieces
Fine salt
Instant dry yeast
PROCEDURE
1 Mix the tomatoes, salt, and yeast together
thoroughly.
2 Place the tomatoes in a jar that has a matching lid and airlock.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING %
250 g 12/3 cups 50
Active 10 min/
Inactive 8 d
~500 g
250 g 1/3 cups 50
7.5 g 11/½ tsp 1.5
0.5 g 18 tsp 0.1
3 Using a ceramic dish that fits inside the jar,
weigh down the tomatoes until they are
submerged. It may take 10-15 min for the
tomatoes to release their liquid.
4 Screw on the lid and airlock. Fill the airlock
with water up to the fill line.
5 Wrap the jar in aluminum foil to block out
any light. Keep at room temperature for 1 d.
6 Unwrap the jar. Ferment for 1 wk in
refrigeration.
7 Remove the tomatoes from the jar and
hand-crush them. Adjust the seasoning
if necessary.
8 Store for 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze for up
to 3 mo.
We bought this wide-mouth jar with a fermentation
airlock at a brewery store. We recommend something that has a wide mouth so that you can clean
it easily. A standard carboy setup would be difficult
to wash (and to get the tomato sauce out of). The
ceramic weight is necessary to keep the tomatoes
submerged so that they don't mold. We learned this
the hard way with our first couple batches.
Although this takes some time to make, the wait is
well worth it. The tomato flavor intensifies significantly
during the fermentation process. This method is especially useful for tomatoes that are not at their peak.
The airlock should fit snugly in the lid. Fill the airlock halfway
with water to allow gas bubbles to flow through it and escape
as the tomato sauce ferments.
SLOW-ROASTED TOMATO SAUCE
INGREDIENTS
Plum tomatoes
Olive oil
Fine salt
WEIGHТ VOLUME
650 g 10-12 ea
as needed
as needed
SCALING %
100
TOTAL TIME
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 2% h
YIELD
~500 g
PROCEDURE
1 Concasse the tomatoes (see page 226). Cut
the tomatoes in half.
2 Preheat a still oven to 150°C/300° F. Lightly
oil a wire rack and place it over a sheet pan
lined with aluminum foil.
3 Place the tomatoes cut side down on the
prepared rack and spray them with a light
coat of olive oil. Turn them over so the cut
side is up and spray them again with a light
coat of olive oil.
4 Roast for 2 h, or until they look wrinkled,
similar to a sun-dried tomato.
It's fairly common throughout the year to find tomatoes that aren't at their peak
ripeness, especially at the grocery store. (The restaurant supplier is also bringing
you whatever tomatoes they got in that day.) What makes for a bad tomato?
One that is hard, pale, and flavorless. The good news is that you can instead
use canned tomatoes (they are canned at their ripest). Or, if you insist on using
fresh tomatoes, you can slow-roast them. Slow roasting will evaporate a good
amount of their moisture, concentrate their flavor, and make them sweeter. This
is a good method for bad tomatoes, but it works well for good ones too.
5 Allow them to cool. Pass through a food mill
and then season with 1% salt by weight or as
needed.
6 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze for
up to 3 mo.
This method works at widely different temperatures to give you different results.
Roasting at 60-77°C/140-170°F (what a food dehydrator or a very slow oven
would be) will give you a concentrated tomato flavor. Turning the temperature up
to 288°C/550° F and roasting the tomatoes with the skin side up will give a very
different flavor. It's up to you if you want to remove the blackened skins before
passing through the food mill.
You can buy olive oil in a spray can that will produce a light and even mist of oil
on the tomatoes. Or you can toss the tomatoes in olive oil, but we find that this
makes the seeds separate from the flesh of the tomato.
SAUCE 231
8
IMPROVING TOMATO SAUCE
Many pizzaioli use sauce as a synonym for tomatoes. The strength of the
sauce rests on the quality of the tomatoes. Butchefs approach sauce
differently,adjusting flavors and playing with balance by adding other
ingredients. These approaches are two different philosophies of cooking.
You can see this dichotomy when you compare Neapolitan pizza makers
and Neapolitan pasta chefs. A pizza maker will open a can of tomatoes,
crush them, and they're ready for use. Chefs will make complicated
sauces with extensive ingredient lists. This divergent philosophy is compounded by the fact that you don't always get the best ingredients. One
philosophy would say that a chef should intervene to maintain consistency by adding salt, sugar, or acids to adjust the sauce. A purist might
say to get the very best tomatoes and don't worry about it. But the latter
stance only works insofar as canned tomatoes because you can't get
flavorful fresh tomatoes year-round. This attitude might seem strange to a
chef who is only used to working with fresh ingredients.
Tomato sauce always has some general characteristics: acid, sweetness, and umami (or savoriness). These characteristics can be bumped
INGREDIENTS AMOUNT NOTES
up, or, depending on the application, used to correct a flaw or enhance
flavors to get a particular result. You can view it as adjusting to improve
a sauce that isn't perfect, or you can view it as a chance to make your
own creation.
Even though tomatoes have a good amount of naturally occurring
umami in them, they can be lacking in flavor especially if they are grown
out of season or were harvested when they were not quite ripe. We
typically recommend that you season your sauce with salt and/or dried
oregano, but you can also attain some complex flavor profiles by adding
other flavorings.
Add the following (either on their own or in combination; if using in
combination, don't use as much as we recommend as a single addition).
For example, if there are two additions, divide the amount for each by two;
if there are three additions, divide each by three; and so on.
For more on aromatic vegetables and other ingredients that you can add to tomato sauce
(including xanthan gum, which functions as a quick thickener), see page 227.
Acidic ingredients
Vinegar (white, champagne, red wine,
white wine, and/or balsamic)
1%-2% Most tomato sauces are somewhat acidic, but sometimes they can be flat. Use these ingredients to liven up your tomato sauce (adding salt helps too).
Lime juice
Lemon juice
Umami ingredients
MSG 0.4%-0.6% There is a stigma surrounding MSG that it's unsafe, but we can assure you that this is false. In
fact, MSG is one ofthe principle ingredients in tomatoes.
Anchovy oil 1.5%-2.5% The more you add, the more anchovy-like the sauce will get. Whether that is a good or bad
thing is up to you (or your customer).
Mushroom powder 1%-2% We recommend using either shiitake or porcini mushroom powder. You won't necessarily
taste the mushrooms, but they will contribute a savory note.
Soy sauce 0.5-1%
Worcestershire sauce 2%-3%
These sauces have powerful flavors that can overwhelm the tomato sauce rather than just
enhance it. Use these sauces sparingly.
Fish sauce
Tomato enhancement
Tomato leaves 7-8 ea per kilo Stir into the sauce and allow to sit for at least 3-4 h to flavor.
of sauce
Tomato paste 8%-10% Even the smallest tomato paste can is typicallytoo much for most preparations. Use what you
need and freeze the rest flat in a zip-top bag so that you can break off pieces of it as you need it.
Freeze-dried tomatoes 3%-4% If you cannot find freeze-dried tomatoes, use sun-dried tomatoes, which have a slightly different taste and texture but will add the desired tomato flavor.
Sweetening ingredients
Sugar 1%-4%
Agave syrup
Honey or hot honey
This range is wide because it is up to you how much to use, whether you want to sweeten the
sauce or to tame its acidity. Add 1 g (14 tsp) at a time and taste after each addition until it has
the level of sweetness you are looking for. Liquid sugars, such as the agave syrup or honey, will
disperse faster into the sauce. Hot honey has a little bit of a spicy kick to it, so be sure to take
that into account when you are adding it.
Complementary flavors
A.1. steak sauce as needed
Fresh basil leaves
Spicy ingredients (crushed red pepper
flakes, commercial hot sauces, fresh chilis,
dried chilis, chipotle peppers, cayenne,
yuzu kosho, gochujang, sriracha)
232
5-6 ea per kilo
of sauce
as needed
While you don't necessarily want the pizza sauce to taste like steak sauce, A.I. and other steak
sauces have flavoring ingredients that work really well with pizza sauce, such as vinegar,
tomato puree, garlic, onions, and celery seed.
Stir into the sauce and allow to sit for at least 3-4 h to flavor.
A little bit of spiciness can really round out a tomato sauce very nicely but be
careful with how much you add, depending on who you are making pizza for.
Our Spicy Tomato Sauce on page 228 is a great example of a spicy sauce that works on pizza.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MIX-AND-MATCH TOMATO SAUCE
Use the table below to combine different options of fresh tomatoes and tomato products to obtain different outcomes for flavor and texture.
Tomato type Taste / texture
Grape tomatoes These range in flavor from sweet to tangy. They have a
good sugar-to-acid balance and are juicy.
Cherry tomatoes These are very sweet and juicy.
Red beefsteak These are juicy and have the most common raw tomato
tomatoes flavor, which is mild.
Green beefsteak These are very tart.
tomatoes
Cocktail
tomatoes
They are similar to red beefsteak tomatoes but a little
sweeter. Their aroma is very similar to that of the tomato
leaf. They have very few seeds, which to some is a positive attribute.
Tomatoes on These are herbaceous and sweet. They taste a lot like
the vine the leaves on the vine.
Plum tomatoes
Heirloom
tomatoes
• Brandywine
• Early Girl
• Green Zebra
• Cherokee
Purple
• Black Krim
• Green Giant
These are workhorse tomatoes that are used in many
applications. They have a good balance of sweet and
tangy flavors.
Some say these are the best-tasting tomatoes that exist.
They are sweet to tangy with great depth of flavor.
All tomatoes come from a vine, but in many grocery stores you can buy tomatoes that
are midsized and almost perfectly round, attached to a vine with six to eight tomatoes
per vine.
If by chance you have access to fresh San Marzano tomatoes or a relative of these
medium-sized tomatoes, you can use them in the same way as plum tomatoes.
There are many varieties of heirloom tomatoes; what they have in common is that they
are mostly available just during tomato season (late summer). They are prized for their
flavor, which is best et appreciated when the tomato is of course ripe, but also raw. Cook
ing them is not the worst thing to do, but a lot of the nuances of their fresh flavor get
lost. These varieties also tend to be very juicy and have a thin viscosity, so additional
cooking or thickening agents (such as tomato paste or xanthan gum) may be necessary
to reach the proper sauce consistency.
Process
Leave as is (no need to core; do not
attempt to peel) and use them raw
in tomato sauce.
Slow-roast them.
Char them.
Remove the stem and core and
use them raw in tomato sauce.
Cut into quarters and slow-roast
(see page 231) or char them (see
page 363).
Slow-roast them (see page 231).
Remove the stem and core, peel
using the concasse method (see
page 226), and use them in raw
tomato sauce.
Slow-roast them (see page 231).
Roast them.
Remove the stem and core, peel
using the concasse method (see
page 226), and use them in raw
tomato sauce.
Slow-roast them (see page 231).
Remove the stem and core, peel
using the concasse method (see
page 226), and use them in raw
tomato sauce.
Slow-roast them (see page 231).
Remove the stem and core, peel
using the concasse method (see
page 226), and use them in raw
tomato sauce.
Recommended combinations
Green beefsteak tomatoes
Canned whole peeled tomatoes
Add to Classic Neapolitan Pizza
Tomato Sauce (see page 225)
Raw Tomato Sauce (see page 237)
Grape and cherry tomatoes
Green beefsteak tomatoes
Use instead of canned whole
peeled tomatoes in Quick New
York Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 225).
Canned whole peeled tomatoes
If slow-roasted, they are very
good on their own as a sauce.
Use instead of canned whole
peeled tomatoes in Quick New
York Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 225).
Deep-Dish Pizza Tomato Sauce
(see page 225)
Raw Tomato Sauce (see page 237)
Green beefsteak tomatoes and
cherry tomatoes
Canned whole peeled tomatoes
Use instead of canned whole
peeled tomatoes in Classic
Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce
(see page 225).
Use instead of canned whole
peeled tomatoes in Quick New
York Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 225).
Raw Tomato Sauce (see page 237)
SAUCE 235
8
ROTAVAP TOMATO SAUCE
INGREDIENTS
Fresh plum tomatoes
Fine salt
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
1 kg 8-9 ea 100
as needed Active 25 min/
Inactive 1 h
~500 g
PROCEDURE
1 Concasse the tomatoes (see page 226).
2 Cut the tomatoes in half. Remove the seeds
but reserve them.
3 Crush the tomatoes with your hands.
4 Place the crushed tomatoes in a rotary
evaporator. Set the water bath temperature
to 45° C/113° F.
Granted, you need a rotary evaporator to make this
sauce. But this method concentrates the flavor of
tomatoes without adding a cooked tomato flavor.
The tomatoes don't necessarily have to be ripe to get
good results.
WATER BATH VARIATION
5 Turn on the vacuum pump, and begin rotating at medium speed.
6 Allow the rotavap to run for 1/½ h, or until
the tomato pulp starts to look thick and
clings to the sides of the bowl.
While most of the tomato flavor resides in the
parenchyma gel surrounding the seeds, they
develop unpleasant flavors when they are treated
under a vacuum. That's why we add them to the
sauce at the end.
7 Turn off the rotavap. Remove the pulp, and
mix in the tomato seeds. Weigh the resulting sauce, and add 1% salt by weight or as
needed.
8 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
The resulting liquid that comes out on the other side
ofthe rotating bowl is not very good. Discard it.
Add this sauce after the pizza is baked to maintain its
fresh, concentrated tomato flavor. The whole point is
to apply very little heat to the tomatoes.
If you don't have a rotavap, follow these steps to make this sauce. This method yields about 300 g (2 cups).
1 Follow steps 1-3 of the Rotavap Tomato
Sauce, above, but discard the seeds.
2 Preheat a water bath to 45° C/113°F.
3 Place the crushed tomatoes into a plastic
bag and clip the bag to the side of the water
bath with the top of the bag open.
4 Cook the sauce for 6 h, stirring
intermittently.
5 Put the sauce in a fine-mesh sieve lined with
cheesecloth that has been placed over a
bowl or plastic tub. Drain for 12 h or overnight. Reserve the drained liquid.
6
7
Weigh the resulting sauce, and add 1% salt
by weight or as needed. Adjust the consistency of the sauce with the reserved liquid
if necessary.
Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
RAW CHERRY ТОMАTO SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Cherry tomatoes 450 g 3 cups 100 Active 5 min ~500 g
Extra-virgin olive oil 35 g 21½ Tbsp 7.78
Sugar 10 g 21/½ tsp 2.22
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp + /8 tsp 1.11
Fresh basil leaves, optional 5g 6-7 ea 1.11
Mid-to late-summer tomatoes are best. You can use
other tomato varieties as long as they are very ripe.
You can also combine different-color tomatoes for a
different flavor and visual effect on the pizza.
PROCEDURE
1 Combine the tomatoes, olive oil, sugar, salt,
and basil in a bowl.
2 Crush with your hands until the tomatoes
are completely broken up.
Cherry tomatoes and grape tomatoes are generally regarded as a salad ingredient. They are sweeter than larger tomato varieties and have a Brix content of 6-9
(compared to 4.5-6 in processing varieties). The varieties that have been selected
3 Reserve at room temperature for up to 2 h.
Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
and hybridized over the years contribute to these qualities. Growers pick cherry
tomatoes at a more mature stage since the skins are tougher and they can withstand the transportation to stores.
RAW TОМАТO SAUCE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Ripe tomatoes 600 g varies 100
Fine salt 5g 34 tsp + 1/s tsp 0.83
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 5-10 min ~500 g
1
PROCEDURE
Remove the stems and cores of the tomatoes with a paring knife.
For a fresh tomato sauce to work, you need to get
tomatoes at their peak of ripeness during their season, normally late summer. When tomatoes are ripe,
very little needs to be done or added to them since
their flavor speaks for itself.
As an optional step, you can peel the tomatoes using
the concasse method (see page 226).
If the sauce is too wet or loose for you, transfer it to a
fine-mesh sieve set over a bowl and allow it to drain.
The drained water can be used for other purposes,
including using it to thin the sauce later if needed.
Just stir some back in. Test for seasoning again.
Many sources do not recommend refrigerating raw
tomatoes in any form because they lose flavor(vola- tile aromatic compounds) and their texture changes.
Do notfret! You have already changed the texture
by passing them through the mill. They won't change
much texturally after this point. When you bring the
tomatoes back up to temperature, the flavor returns
to normal.
The volume of the tomatoes willvary depending on
type of tomato and size. Per kilogram, you might get
six to seven large beefsteak tomatoes, eight to nine
plum tomatoes, or two to three pints of small cherry
or grape tomatoes.
2 Pass the tomatoes through a food mill with
a grinding disc attachment large enough to
let the seeds pass through easily.
For more on types of tomatoes and their flavor,
see our Mix-and-Match Tomato Sauce guide on
page 235.
3 Season with the salt and/or other flavorings
(see page 232).
4 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
If the tomatoes are too dry to be saucy, add a little
bit of tomato water, tomato juice, or water to adjust
the consistency of the sauce.
SAUCE 237
8
PARAMETRIC RECIPE
BEST BETS FOR PESTOО
Pesto is one of the top three sauces used on pizzas.The combinations of
herbs, nuts, and oil that you can blend together are virtually endless. A
traditional pesto is made with a mortar and pestle. You can make it that
way if you're inclined, but a countertop or immersion blender works great,
as does a food processor. The classic pesto Genovese recipe is made with
basil. Other herbs can work well, but drier ones such as rosemary and
thyme may be too hard to puree into a paste. Try to combine these hard
herbs with softer ones, which will help produce asmoother puree.
Type
Basil pesto
Herb Scaling % Garlic Scaling %
Cheese
Fresh basil 50 Garlic cloves, peeled
and blanched
15
Scaling%
Parmigiano-Reggiano and 100
Pecorino Romano, grated
Parsley pesto Fresh flat-leaf parsley 50 Garlic cloves, peeled
and blanched
12 Pecorino Romano, grated 90
Fines herbes pesto Mixture offresh chervil, 60
chives, tarragon, and
flat-leaf parsley
n/a Mimolette, grated 100
Leek pesto Leeks, blanched 65 n/a
Arugula pesto Arugula 50 n/a
Comté, grated 75
Stilton 70
Spinach pesto Baby spinach, blanched 75 n/a Paneer 50
Shiso pesto Shiso leaf 50 Black garlic cloves,
peeled
10 Firm tofu* 100
*Although this isn't acheese, it provides the same structural component as the cheese in the pesto.
New York pizza with pesto
Parsley pesto
Shiso pesto Spinach pesto Basil pesto
Nuts Scaling % Oil Scaling % Other Scaling %
Pine nuts, toasted 15 Olive oil 100 Fine salt 1
Hazelnuts, toasted 25 Chili oil 100 Fine salt 1
Almonds, toasted 20 Canola oil 100 Fine salt 1
Walnuts, untoasted 25 Lemon olive oil 100 Fine salt 1
Macadamia nuts, 30 Extra-virgin olive oil 100 Fine salt 1
untoasted
Cashews, toasted 20 Curry-Infused Oil
see page 382
100 Fine salt 1
Sesame seeds, toasted 15 Toasted sesame oil mixed 100
with canola oil
Fine salt 1
Arugula pesto Leek pesto Fines herbes pesto
SAUCE 239
8
HOW TO Make Pesto
la
1 Combine all of the ingredients in a
blender, and blend until you obtain a
smooth paste.
1b 2
2 Use right away, or cover with plastic wrap
pressed directly over the surface. This can
help slow down oxidation, as the pesto
will begin to turn brown.
3
Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo. Bring up to room temperature at least 2 h before spooning onto
baked pizza.
HOW TO Stabilize a Pesto
If you want to keep the oil in the pesto from separating, the solution is to
add an emulsifier, such as propylene glycol alginate (PGA). The problem is that in order for it to work, it needs to be dispersed in water and
heated to 80°C/176°F to be activated. Calculate 10% of it for the water
1 Sprinkle the PGA over the water while
blending with an immersion blender to
disperse it evenly.
amount and 0.5% for the PGA amount. This might be a very small amount
of water. If this is the case, you can make a larger batch of the PGA water,
and then weigh 10.5%.
2 Bring the liquid up to 80°C/176°F, and
keep it at that temperature for 3 min,
whisking occasionally.
An alternative method is to use 0.5% gum tragacanth plus 0.2% xanthan gum instead of
0.5% PGA. For these ingredients, you need only to disperse them in the 10% cold water;
they do not need to be heated at all. Sprinkle them into the water while you blend with an
immersion blender. Allow the ingredients to hydrate for 1 h, and then blend into the pesto.
3 Allow to cool down completely. If you
made a larger batch, weigh the 10.5% you
will need. Blend it into the pesto using an
immersion blender.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
Basil pesto is a popular sauce alternative to the typical
tomato sauce or white sauces. You can use it as a finishing
sauce as well as a sauce base.
240 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SAUCE
The marinara sbagliata, from 10 Diego Vitagliano Pizzeria
in Naples, Italy, uses a striking spiral pattern made with
San Marzano tomato sauce and oregano pesto.
241
Tomato skins are sometimes used as
sauce thickeners, but they are first
dehydrated and pulverized and then
stirred into the sauce; 3% of the weight
of the sauce in powdered tomato peels
is recommended.
Most canned tomato products are
made to meet consistency standards
first and Brix standards second. Some
producers can reach the proper
balance between consistency and Brix
without adding sugars or thickeners.
They can do so by selecting proper varieties and managing incoming tomato
Brix, processing temperatures, and
cooking times.
When baking the tomato sauce on a Neapolitan pizza, it is important to evaporate enough
moisture so that it is not soupy but not as dry
as the tomato sauce shown on the pizza above.
It may look different on your pizza depending
on the toppings that you are using.
THICKENING SAUCES
When it comes to thickening sauces, we feel it's
essential to know the best way to thicken the sauce,
but also to understand why certain agents do not
work. We tested several different thickeners, from
traditional options such as starches, pectin, and
hydrocolloids, to eggs and tomato powder. Although
most did thicken our sauces, not all were texturally
pleasing or appetizing once they were baked on a
pizza. One of the major flaws of some of the tested
thickeners was that they made the sauce excessively
gummy. Not what you want on your pizza. This was
most common with starches, pectin, and hydrocolloids, even when used in small amounts. The exceрtion we found was that a small amount of xanthan
gum (0.1%) is best at thickening tomato sauces for
Neapolitan and New York pizzas (see next page).
SAUCE CONSISTENCY
Two things are key when you make your pizza sauce:
flavor and texture. A good sauce needs both to work.
Let's take a closer look at the physical aspect of your
sauce: its consistency.
Why is consistency so important, and what
should it be for optimal pizza baking? We baked
several 30 cm / 12 in marinara pizzas sauced with
180 g of differently diluted sauces and recorded the
results. Not surprisingly, our thickest sauce-made
from pure tomato solids-completely dried out
during baking, forming a skin that detached from the
pizza (see photo at left).
On the opposite end of the spectrum, our thinnest sauce-prepared by diluting tomato solids with
tomato water (1:2.5)-was light in color, clearly
soupy, and undercooked. For marinara sauce, a 1:1.5
solid-to-liquid ratio works best because it provides
just enough evaporation for an optimal consistency
after 1 minute of baking.When baked according
to our master recipe, the 1:1.5 dilution ratio works
best, but this thickness might need adjustment
depending on how much sauce you put on the pizza
(for 180 g, it works very well).
If your sauce is watery once your pizza is baked,
should you just carry on with the baking until it
concentrates? While you can extend the baking
time in some cases, you have to make sure the crust
doesn't burn before the sauce is cooked. For this
reason, many pizzaioli finish baking the pizza at the
mouth of the oven, where it's cooler, so that the
dough won't burn while the excess moisture from
the sauce evaporates.
Different styles of pizza require different sauce
consistencies depending on the desired attributes
and baking temperatures. In our lab, we like to take a
methodical approach and control the parameters of
pizza making, including the consistency of the sauce.
We found two simple methods of understanding
sauce consistency to help you get better results.
The most straightforward way is to invest in a
consistometer and use it to guide you in consistency
adjustments (see page 244). Alternatively, you can
do a quick experiment with baking your sauce in a
pan to see what changes it undergoes in the oven
(see next page).
242
Thin Semi-thick Thick
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Thicken a Thin Sauce
1 Pour one-quarter of the sauce into a bowl
or container.
2
Using an immersion blender, disperse 0.1%
xanthan gum in the separate portion of the
sauce, pouring it in slowly (don't dump it
all in at once). This will take 20-30 s.
3 Return this thickened portion of the sauce
to the remaining sauce, and whisk to
combine.
The thickening effect of xanthan gum is almost
immediate but don't add more if the sauce seems
thin. Once the xanthan gum hydrates completely
(24 h), it will thicken the sauce properly.
HOW TO Test Sauce Consistency
We provide many great recipes for pizza sauce in this book that have been
tested extensively, but what if you have a personal recipe you want to use
or have a nontraditional pizza sauce in mind that you want to try out (see
page 249)? Here is an easy way to test sauce consistency. The sauce's consistency is most often determined by the amount of water and/or fat that
1
2
Pick the sauce you want to test and the
pizza style. Deciding what pizza you want
to use the sauce on is crucial because that
will determine the temperature you set
your oven to.
Preheat the oven to the desired temperature (see page 1:392).
it contains. You could certainly test it out on an actual pizza, but with the
method below, only the sauce will be affected ratherthan an entire pizza.
A 30 cm/12 in sauté pan can be used for round pizzas such as Neapolitan,
New York, and artisan. You can use the actual Detroit-style, New York
square, or al taglio pans to test the sauce for those pizzas.
3 Weigh the amount of sauce recommended
for the smallest size of your style of pizza.
4 Once the oven is hot, pour the sauce into
a sauté pan or a pizza pan with the approximate diameter or size of your pizza.
Spread it evenly.
5
Bake the sauce for the amount of time we
recommend for your style of pizza.
6
Take the pan out of the oven. The sauce
should be the consistency you want on
your baked pizza. If your sauce is too wet,
you will need to thicken it by using xanthan gum or by reducing it in a pot over
medium heat to evaporate moisture. If it is
too thick, simply add water, stock, or
cream to loosen it up.
4
SAUCE
6
243
8
HOW TO Use a Bostwick Consistometer
A Bostwick consistometer, often simply referred to as a Bostwick, is a tool
that allows you to measure the distance a viscous sample flows during
a given amount of time. This flow rate represents the consistency of the
sample, which would be expressed in cm/30 s, or the distance 100 mL of
ambient-temperature (21°C/70° F) sauce travels in 30 s.
1 Place the Bostwick on a level surface, and
adjust the leveling screw until the gas bubble within the level is centered.
2 Close the spring-loaded gate.
For more on methods to adjust the consistency of your sauce
for baking on pizza, see the Adapting Pasta Sauces and Soups
for Pizza table, page 247.
3
4
Knowing the typical consistencies of sauces for every style of pizza
can guide you in adjusting the consistency of any homemade or storebought tomato sauce, or any nontraditional sauces that you may contemplate baking on pizza. Depending on the outcome, you may consider
thinning, thickening, or straining your sauce.
Fill the reservoir to the top with the
room-temperature sauce to be tested
(you'll need to stir the sauce first). Make
sure the chamber is full and contains no
air pockets.
Release the product by springing the gate,
and at the same time start a 30-s timer.
5 After 30 s, observe and record the measurement in cm.
6 After you finish, clean the consistometer
with running water and let dry.
CSC SCIENTIFIC
F CSC SCIENTIF
18 19 20 21 22 23
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Thinner sauces will flow farther than thicker sauces during the
30-second time period used in a Bostwick consistometer test.
RECOMMENDED PIZZA SAUCE CONSISTENCY
Type Viscosity (cm Bostwick)*
New York Square Pizza Tomato Sauce
see page 225
2-2.5
Deep-Dish/Stuffed-Crust/ Detroit-Style Pizza Tomato Sauce 2-2.5
see page 225
New York/ Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce
see page 227
3.5-5
Thin-Crust/Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce
see page 225
5.5-6
Classic Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce
see page 225
7-11
*The consistency may vary depending on homogeneity and temperature. A tomato sauce is a suspension of tomato solids, which might leak the
liquid. For best results, stirthe sauce before measuring the consistency.
244 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EXPERIMENT
AN ALTERNATIVE WAY OF MAKING BÉCHAMEL
White sauces tend to use flour as a thickener, which can dilute the flavor
and leave an unpleasant goopy texture in the baked pizza. We wondered
if it was possible to make a white sauce without flour or starch and still
obtain the proper consistency.We tested béchamel and roux-thickened
soups (such as gumbo, chowder, and bisque) with three thickening agents
in place of the roux (butter plus flour): low-acyl gellan gum, iota carrageenan, and a combination of methylcellulose F50 and xanthan gum.
Béchamel thickened with gellan gum
We got our best result by dispersing 0.8% low-acyl gellan gum into
the sauce/soup base, and then boiling the liquids to activate the gellan.
Once the liquid was cool and fully gelled, we pureed the sauces in a
blender until smooth. We use gellan in our Modernist Béchamel (see
page 253). It's an optional replacement for a roux in our Laksa Sauce (see
page 274), Bisque Sauce (see page 275), and Gumbo Sauce (see page
276). The béchamel and sauces were similar in consistency to their flourthickened versions and baked well on a pizza.
Gumbo sauce thickened with gellan gum
USING OUR CLASSIC NEAPOLITAN PIZZA TОМАТО SAUCE ON NEW YORK PIZZA DOUGH
Can a sauce be adaptable to two different styles of pizza baked
under different conditions? The answer is yes, but the surrogate
sauce must have the right consistency for baking on a different style
of pizza and should be able to accommodate a desired flavor profile.
For example, Neapolitan sauce without any additives is far too
loose for the baking conditions of a New York pizza. However, once
we developed the Modernist Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 226), which is thickened with 0.1% xanthan gum, we hypothesized that it could work on New York pizza.
Xanthan gum's high degree of pseudoplasticity results in an
almost instantaneous increase in viscosity, which promotes better
heat transfer. This means a sauce can work baked at 450°C/840°F
as well as at 315°C/600° F. The heat flexibility range in a xanthan
gum-thickened sauce makes it a viable candidate for both Neapolitan
and New York pizzas.
Although the sauce baked on a New York pizza provides a good
alternative, it is important to note the flavor differences in the sauces.
Our Modernist Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce is very simple, with
some slight acidity and salt, while the New York/ Artisan Pizza
Tomato Sauce has a deeper cooked tomato flavor that is seasoned
with anchovy oil, garlic, oregano, fresh tomato leaves or basil leaves,
and onions. While it may be convenient to have one sauce for two
pizza styles, it will lack some of the traditional flavors that make each
pizza style distinct.
SAUCE 245
8
HOW TO Disperse a Thickener
A starch, hydrocolloid, or other thickening agent will work properly
only if you distribute it evenly throughout a liquid. This process is called
dispersal, and just mixing dry powder into a liquid is not good enough,
as you may have discovered if you have ever added cornstarch to a gravy
and ended up with powdery lumps. Properly dispersing a thickener is
not always as easy as it sounds. You don't get reliable visual cues when
blending in the agent, so take extra care. Thickeners usually disperse
most evenly in cold liquid. The notable exceptions to the rule are cellulose gums such as methylcellulose.
Whenever you need to use more than one thickener, mix all of the
dry agents together before adding them to the liquid; dispersing each
one separately can lead to uneven distribution. If you are going to mixin a liquid fat or oil, then you can first disperse the agents into the fat and
then disperse the mixture into the liquid you want to thicken. This is how
a traditional roux is made.
Many cooks simply whisk or stir thickeners into the liquid. That works
fine for most starches, but many hydrocolloids are more finicky. An
immersion blender or commercial blender does a fine job.
1
Bring the liquid to the correct temperature. Most-but not all-thickeners disperse
best in cold liquids; see specific recipes for
guidance.
2 Sprinkle the powder evenly over the surface of the liquid or a portion of the liquid.
If using more than one powder, mix them
dry before sprinkling. If using a blender,
you can add the powder while it runs.
3 If necessary, add the portion ofthe thickened sauce back to the main sauce. Blend
for at least 1 full min to distribute evenly.
Don't blend for more than a few minutes,
since this may overmix the thickener and
end up thinning the sauce.
EXPERIMENT
SUGAR-FREE PANCAKE SYRUP THICKENER FOR PIZZA SAUCES
Sauce texture has always interested serious cooks. While there are
dozens of ways to thicken liquids, we were particularly intrigued by an
ingredient found in sugar-free pancake syrup that is responsible for giving it a smooth syrupy texture: cellulose gum (often used in combination
with xanthan gum).
Cellulose gums, sold as flavorless white powders, gel when heated
and stop gelling when chilled. They play a key role in commercial baking
as stabilizers that hold food together in the high heat of the oven. This
property also makes them attractive candidates to thicken a pizza sauce.
For this experiment, we chose methylcellulose, a versatile type of cellulose that has a proven record for being an excellent rheology modifier,
film former, and water-retention agent. Additionally, it is highly soluble
in cold liquids.
We used it in combination with a small amount of xanthan gum
and tested it on our Classic Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see page
225), Invincible Vinaigrette (see page 266), and commercially available
Worcestershire sauce.
All three sauces were successfully thickened using methylcellulose and a small amount of xanthan gum. For the vinaigrette and
Worcestershire sauce, the combination of the two thickening agents
yielded sauces with higher viscosities at room temperature, which were
further increased when heated due to gelling of the cellulose gum. These
didn't work great as pizza sauces but could be used as finishing sauces
after baking.
Although this method worked to increase the Neapolitan sauce's
viscosity, it had a gummy texture after baking. For an alternative way of
thickening Neapolitan sauce, see Modernist Neapolitan Pizza Tomato
Sauce recipe on page 226.
ADAPTING PASTA SAUCES AND SOUPS FOR PIZZA
Bolognese and chutney don't usually spring to mind when you are
thinking about the sauce that you want to put on your pizza, but we
found that soups and non-pizza sauces can be adapted really well for
this purpose. You just might need to adjust to their consistency. There
are three basic consistencies we are looking for in pizza sauces: thin,
semi-thick, and thick (see page 242). Thin pizza sauces are used for pizzas
baked at high temperatures, such as Neapolitan pizza. The excess liquid
evaporates in a few seconds, leaving a smooth sauce that is still moist
but does not puddle. Semi-thick sauces are (obviously) thicker than thin
sauces but still easily spreadable. These are used for most pizzas that
Type of sauce or soup
Oil-based sauces
Pasta sauces
Adjustment
bake at temperatures between 260° C and 315°C/500° F and 600° F, like
New York, artisan, and Brazilian thin-crust pizzas. Thick sauces hold their
shape when they are spooned or spread on a surface and do not flow.
These sauces are usually applied after baking for pizza styles like Detroitstyle and deep-dish. To adapt soups and non-pizza sauces successfully,
the key is knowing what style you intend to use them for and adjusting
their viscosity accordingly. The following table covers broad categories of
sauces and soups and what you can do to make the appropriate adjustments. We cover more about how to convert pasta sauces for use on
pizza on page 247.
If it's too thin, reduce the amount of oil. You can always add more at the
end if needed.
Thicken the pesto by emulsifying it (see page 240).
Some sauces, such as Bolognese, vodka sauce, and puttanesca, can
be used as is on medium-crust pizzas like New York or artisan. Thicker
sauces work on deep-dish or Detroit-style if applied after baking. If the
sauce is too thick, you can thin it with heavy cream, water, stock, or
wine.
Apply
before or after baking
before or after baking
Starchy soups The consistency of soups such as potato soup, clam chowder, gumbo,
and cream-based soup will likely work well as a pizza sauce. If the soup
is roux-thickened, consider replacing the flour with other thickeners to
obtain the best flavor possible (see page 245).
before baking
Vegetable or fruit soups Thicken with xanthan gum or Wondra flour if the soup is too thin.
Alternatively, reduce ina saucepot over medium heat to evaporate
moisture and thicken to sauce consistency.
before baking
Vegetable or fruit purees For a thick puree, add more liquid (water, heavy cream, or stock). For a
thin puree, thicken with xanthan gum or by reduction.
before baking
Curries "Curry" can refer to a sauce or an actual stew (vegetables or meat and
vegetables served in a curry sauce). Both workwell on a pizza, one as a
sauce and the other as a sauce plus topping. Most curries of both types
are thick enough to use as is, but if you find it to be too thin, you can
thicken it by reduction or by adding tapioca maltodextrin (start with 3%
and check as you go before adding more).
before baking
Stocks, jus, consommé
Heat-stable emulsions, such as
hollandaise (see page 260) or
béarnaise
Non-heat-stable emulsions, such
as vinaigrette and beurre blanc
Mayonnaise (see page 262) or
Aioli (see page 264)
Jams, jellies, and marmalades
Chutneys
These are often too watery to add as a sauce on a pizza directly, but
they can be thickened by reduction ina saucepot (to an extent) or with
Wondra flour (start with 2%), xanthan gum, or propylene glycol alginate
(PGA). Since these are relatively loose, it is best to apply as a flavoring
component rather than the main sauce.
If the sauce is too thick, add clarified butter or ghee. Our base recipe for
hollandaise works with all styles of pizza.
You can emulsify these with xanthan gum or propylene glycol alginate
(PGA). Use sparingly as a condiment, not in the same quantities you
would use a tomato sauce.
You can use these as is, but don't use as much of them as you would a
tomato sauce.
These can be loosened by stirring them with a little water or fruit juice.
Alternatively, they can be left as is and used as a topping by spooning
them.
Chutney (below) is usually very chunky and doesn't really act as a sauce;
it is better to think of it as a topping or a condiment. However, you can
puree chutney and adjust the consistency by thinning it with water or
other liquids if you want to use it as a sauce.
before baking (drizzle moderately
over toppings)
before, during, or after baking
before baking for Invincible
Vinaigrette (see page 266); after baking forother sauces
after baking (it won't separate while
hot, but do not put it on before baking
because the high temperatures of the
oven will break the emulsion.)
before or after baking
before baking (if pureeing) or after
baking
8
Campbells CONDENSED
INTERNATIONAL EXPOSIT
1900
Tomato
SOUP
EXPERIMENT
ADAPTING PURCHASED SOUPS FOR PIZZA
When you think about it, any sauce-any edible liquid, really-can
potentially be adapted as a pizza sauce if it satisfies two conditions: the
consistency is right for baking and the flavor is strong enough. For practical purposes, however, you need to take your schedule into consideration as well. Do you have the time to develop sauce bases from scratch?
If the answer is no, fortunately the market offers plenty of interesting,
high-quality, ready-to-use sauce options. Not all of them are adapted for
baking, so we experimented with ways to adjust them to suit our needs.
We tested a number of commercially available products from
different categories, such as mole, salsa, ponzu, curries (tikka masala,
vindaloo, and korma), pesto, hollandaise, mango chutney, tomato soup,
cream of corn soup, and canned pumpkin puree (see page 256). The
idea was to provide examples of these sauces, soups, or purees for baking on various styles of pizza that require different sauce consistencies,
from thin sauces for Neapolitan pizzas, to thicker versions for New York
pizza and even thicker still for Detroit-style pizza.
When the sauce is applied before baking, its consistency is critical
and might need adjustment. If a sauce tends to burn when baking a test
run in a pan (see page 243), or if its consistometer reading is low (see
page 244), the sauce is too thick and needs to be thinned. If a sauce
turns out to be too liquid after baking, try adding starches or hydrocolloids before baking.
Pizza Soup Dilution Thickener Consistency (cm Bostwick)
at 21°C/70°F
Baked or garnished
Neapolitan Pizza
see page 3:52
Tomato 5% water n/a 7.5 baked (120 g)
Neapolitan Pizza
see page 3:52
Cream of corn 20% water n/a 5 baked (120 g)
New York Pizza
see page 3:71
Tomato n/a 5% Ultra-Tex 3 0.75 baked (160 g)
New York Pizza
see page 3:71
Cream of corn n/a n/a 2 baked (160 g)
Detroit-Style Pizza
see page 3:109
Tomato n/a 5% Ultra-Tex 3 0.75 garnished warm (100 g)
Detroit-Style Pizza Cream of corn n/a n/a 2 garnished warm (100 g)
see page 3:109
The consistency of condensed tomato soup out of
the can is a little too thick for baking on Neapolitan
pizza yet too thin for baking on New York pizza. For
Neapolitan, we adjusted the soup by diluting it with
water. The ideal dilution amount will vary depending on the soup that you are trying to adapt to pizza.
Traditional tomato sauce consistencies could be used
as a ballpark reference (see page 242); note that given
the fact that nontraditional sauces are different in
nature, they do not have to match the tomato sauce
consistency exactly. A small amount of a modified
starch (5% Ultra-Tex 3) works well to thicken the sauce
if you are baking your tomato soup on a New York
pizza or using it on Detroit-style pizza after it comes
out of the oven.
One can envision adapting any unusual sauce for pizza; you
need only to get the amount and texture right. In addition
to detailing thickening or thinning parameters, we provide
recommendations for outside-of-the-box sauce and cheese
combinations, using recipes in this chapter as well as commercial sauces, on page 256. Some suggestions for toppings
are included as well.
SAUCE 249
8
250
DAIRY-BASED SAUCES
Tomato sauce might be the most common sauce used
on pizza, but there's no denying the surging popularity of white sauce being used in its place. A number
of sauces can fit into the traditional "white sauce"
category. We have grouped ours into emulsion-based
sauces (see page 259) and dairy-based sauces, plus a
few that fall into our converted pasta sauces category
(see page 247).
The dairy-based sauces in this section rely on
milk, cream, and cheese as their main ingredients
and could technically be classified as emulsions
because milk itself is an emulsion straight from the
cow. Butterfat (also called milk fat) is suspended
in water, and the emulsion is stabilized by casein
protein. But it is not stable for long because it is
prone to a type of emulsion failure named for the
result-creaming. The process of emulsifying and
stabilizing butterfat droplets in liquid milk, known
as homogenization, has become a household term.
Cream and butter are also emulsions.
A dairy-based sauce can be as simple as drizzling
cream over cheese on pizza dough or using a storebought dairy product like Greek yogurt or ricotta
(see page 338 for our recipe). Most dairy-based
sauces, however, are thickened in some way. Many
of our dairy-based sauces feature a classic roux base,
while some are thickened with other starches or
gums. Ifyou'd like to try a different thickener in the
recipes, see our thickening recommendations on
page 243.
HEAVY CREAM AS A SAUCE
One of the simplest dairy sauces is heavy cream,
which can be poured directly onto a pizza before
baking. It will evaporate enough while it bakes to
meld with the cheese and turn into a fantastically
creamy, rich sauce. The caveat is not to add too
much; a generous drizzle will suffice. Otherwise,
loading your pizza into the oven will be like trying
to move a ve a kiddie pool around without spilling any
water, and you could possibly pull out a soupy pizza.
We use heavy cream in our version of New Haven
Clam Pie (see page 3:73), but it also works very
well on white pizzas as a replacement for béchamel
sauce, which could get overcooked and goopy after
baking. (Remember, it has already been cooked in
a pot ahead of time; baking it further will evaporate
some of its moisture and make it thicker.) Drizzling
cream on pizza is also much simpler than making
a béchamel. Some ofthe moisture will evaporate
from the heavy cream and the fat might separate
out depending on the type of cream you use. For
the most part, though, it combines with the other
toppings to create a uniform sauce.
We suggest using heavy cream with the highest
fat content you can find or, alternatively, crema
fresca, which has an almost perfect sauce consistency. This Mexican cream is similar to heavy cream
but a little thicker. You can drizzle it on pizza before
or after baking. It will not lose its shape if poured
over hot pizzas.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
If all you have is heavy cream and you want to
put it on the pizza after baking, there are a few things
you can do to thicken it. Place it in a saucepot (bigger than what you think you'll need because heavy
cream can boil over) and bring it to a boil, then turn
the heat down to a simmer and let it reduce for 5-7
minutes. This will evaporate some of the water in the
cream and concentrate all of the solid ingredients,
making it thicker. Alternatively, you can add 2%
Wondra flour by weight. Incorporate it using an
immersion blender and allow the cream to thicken in
refrigeration for 2 hours before using it. You can also
use this method but with 4% tapioca maltodextrin
instead. Another option is to mix 2 parts heavy
cream and 1 part mascarpone or equal parts heavy
cream and crème fraîche (or sour cream).
We recommend using 50 g (3 Tbsp + 2 tsp)
cream for Neapolitan pizza and 120 g (1½ cup) for
New York pizza. Place the recommended amount of
cheese on the shaped pizza dough. Gently drizzle the
cream over the cheese so it spreads evenly between
the cheese pieces but does not flow over the edge
of the crust. Using heavy cream on a Detroit-style
pizza as sauce doesn't work very well. Use 65 g (14
cup) mascarpone instead and apply it with a spoon
or piping bag.
THICK STORE-BOUGHТ
DAIRY SAUCES
Sour cream, crème fraîche, Devon cream, clotted
cream, mascarpone, and unsweetened Greek yogurt
are thick enough to spread thinly on the surface of a
pizza dough to act as a sauce. We suggest tempering
these for 1-2 hours before using them because they
could slow down baking if they are too cold when
they come in contact with the dough. They will also
be easier to spread at room temperature. We use a
small offset spatula to spread these sauces over the
dough. Typically we place other toppings over the
sauce, such as cheese and cured meats or vegetables.
These creams will bubble and some might have
a little fat separation. For the most part, they will
simply lose some moisture and become firmer as the
pizza bakes, making them ideal in terms of consistency and flavor. Ricotta, in some forms, is another
dairy product that is smooth enough to spread on
pizza dough (although it arguably enters the cheese
territory). You can mix ricotta with equal parts heavy
cream (by weight) to make a very flavorful and
spreadable base. This sauce will not lose its shape
much while baking and might even brown a little,
depending on the heat level of the oven.
Neapolitan pizza with a
huitlacoche puree dough, heavy
cream, cotija, charred poblano
peppers, and squash blossoms
8
BÉCHAMEL
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Unsalted butter 35 g 2/½ Tbsp 7.95
TOTAL TIME
Active 5-10 min/
YIELD
~450 g
All-purpose flour 25 g 3 Tbsp +1/½ tsp 5.68 Inactive 15 min
Whole milk, cold 440 g 134 cups +2 Tbsp 100
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp +1 tsp 1.14
PROCEDURE
1 Combine the butter and flour in a small
saucepot.
2 Cook over medium heat, whisking occasionally, to make a blond roux, about 5 min.
3 Add the milk in a steady stream, and bring
to a boil, whisking constantly.
4 Reduce the heat and simmer, whisking
occasionally, to thicken the sauce, about 15
min.
5 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
6 Strain into a container set over an ice bath
to chill.
7 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
MODERNIST BÉCHAMEL TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Whole milk, cold 440 g 13/4 cups +2 Tbsp 100 Active 5-10 min/ ~400 g
Low-acyl gellan gum 3.5 g 2 tsp 0.8 Inactive 15 min
Fine salt 5g 34 tsp + 1/8 tsp 1.14
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
PROCEDURE
1 Put the milk in a small saucepot. Sprinkle
the gellan gum over the milk, and let it
hydrate for 3-5 min.
2 Whisk in the gellan to incorporate. Continue to whisk constantly while bringing to a
boil over medium heat.
3 Reduce the heat and simmer, whisking
occasionally, for 15 min to thicken the
sauce.
4 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
5 Strain into a container set over an ice bath
to chill until fully set.
6 Blend the set gel into a puree.
7 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
This sauce is best used at room temperature. You
can also add a pinch of grated nutmeg to season the
sauce further.
To make Ranchamel, stir 50 g (14 cup + 2 tsp) ranch
powder into 475 g (134 cups +3 Tbsp) Béchamel or
Modernist Béchamel after the sauce has thickened.
To make Mornay sauce, stir 85 g (¼ cup) grated
Gruyère cheese into 415 g (12/3 cups) Béchamel or
Modernist Béchamel after the sauce has thickened.
8
New York pizza with garlic chive béchamel, cheddar
cheese, sweated onions and leeks, grilled onion
petals, ramps, garlic chips, and pickled onions
GARLIC CHIVE BÉCHAMEL TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Garlic chives, coarsely chopped 150 g 3 cups 42.86
All-purpose flour 25 g 3 Tbsp 714
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 20-25 min
~500 g
Unsalted butter 25 g 1 Tbsp + 21/2 tsp 7.14
Whole milk, cold 350 g 11/2 cups 100
Fine salt as needed
This garlic chive béchamel is one of the rare cases
of a green sauce that keeps its color as it bakes. It
also provides a balanced allium flavor, making for
both a delicious and beautiful sauce.
PROCEDURE
1 Bring a large pot of heavily salted water to a
boil.
2 Blanch the chives until tender, 1-2 min.
3 Transfer to a container set over an ice bath
to chill.
4 Drain, then transfer to a blender.
5 Puree until smooth.
6 Pass the puree through a fine-mesh sieve.
This should yield about 100 g (1/3 cup)
puree.
7 Combine the flour and butter in a small
saucepot.
10 Reduce the heat and simmer, whisking
occasionally, to thicken the sauce, about 15
min.
11 Remove the pot from the heat.
12 Add the garlic chive puree and salt. Adjust
8 Cook over medium heat, whisking occa- the seasoning if necessary.
sionally, to make a blond roux, about 5 min.
9 Add the milk to the pot, and bring to a boil,
whisking constantly.
13 Transfer to a container set over an ice bath
to chill.
14 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
254 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MODERNIST CHEESE SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Water 100 g 1/4 cup +3 Tbsp 50
Active 10 min ~400 g
Wheat beer 75 g 1/3 cup 37.5
Sodium citrate 10g 11/½ tsp + 1/ tsp 5
Fine salt 4.5 g 3/4 tsp 2.25
lota carrageenan 1.25 g 1/4 tsp +1/8 tsp 0.63
Aged gouda cheese, grated 200 g 1/2 cups 100
Sharp cheddar cheese, grated 16.5 g 2 Tbsp + 1 tsp 8.25
You can replace the sodium citrate with sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP). Some people prefer this
salt because it leaves less of a sour taste than sodium
citrate. For more on where to find these ingredients,
see Resources, page 3:377.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
1
PROCEDURE
In a small saucepot, whisk together the
water, beer, sodium citrate, salt, and iota
carrageenan.
This recipe was adapted from Modernist Cuisine
at Homе.
2 Bring to a simmer over medium heat, whisking constantly.
3 Stir the cheeses in slowly, until completely
smooth.
4 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
5 If not using right away, cool to room temperature before covering.
6 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Reheat to
melt before using. Do not freeze.
RACLETTE SLICE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Water 160 g 2/3 cup 42.67
Active 5-10 min ~535 g
Skim milk powder 3g 28 tsp 0.8
Sodium citrate 1.5 g
Raclette or Gruyère, grated 375 g
14 tsp
3/½ cups
0.4
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323. 100
PROCEDURE
1 Combine the water, milk powder, and
sodium citrate in a small saucep ot, and
bring to a simmer over medium heat,
whisking constantly.
This is a method we developed for Modernist Cuisine
to make cheese slices similar to American cheese.
The key ingredient is sodium citrate, which makes
cheese melt in a way that is more "gooey"than "stretchy." This recipe makes two 30 cm/12 in discs,
but it can easily be adapted for larger or smaller
sizes, as long as you have the right pan size to let the
hot mix set in.
2 Gradually whisk in the cheese until completely melted.
3 Simmer for I min.
4 Divide the mixture evenly between two
30 cm/12 in cake pans lined with lightly
oiled plastic wrap.
The disc is applied onto the pizza halfway through
baking to melt the cheese completely.
5 Cover with plastic wrap pressed directly
6
over the surface. Allow to cool.
Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
You can replace the sodium citrate with sodium
hexametaphosphate (SHMP). Some people prefer
this salt because it leaves less of a sour taste than
sodium citrate. For more on where to find these
ingredients, see Resources, page 3:377.
CHARCOAL MASCARPONE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Mascarpone 450 g 2 cups 100
Active 1 min ~450 g
Food-grade activated charcoal 98 1 Tbsp +1 tsp 2
PROCEDURE
Combine the mascarpone and charcoal.
2 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not freeze.
SAUCE
Although we use this as a sauce on The Dark Side Neapolitan (see page 3:56), you
could also use this as a topping.
255
8
EXPERIMENT
OUTSIDE-OF-THE-BOX PIZZA SAUCE
Sauces are essential elements in cuisines all over the world, and they
come in many types, forms, flavors, and applications. Although this
diversity might seem intimidating, we felt that outside-of-the box sauce
ideas can make for a fantastic pizza experience. In our quest for the
extraordinary, we explored some interesting avenues. aven For example, can
French onion soup be adapted into a sauce that works on pizza? Can we
bake pizzas with pasta sauces? To our satisfaction, we discovered that
even the most uncommon sauces can be applied successfully on pizza.
We tested about two dozen sauces, from chicken jus to hot vinaigrette, and present here our suggestions for ways to adapt them to
specific consistencies: thin for Neapolitan-style pizzas; slightly thicker
for New York, artisan, thin-crust, and New York square pizzas; and thick
for Detroit-style and al taglio pizzas. Ifyou find yourself wonderingwhat
sauce you should try next, look no further.
Interesting examples from this study include flour-thickened soups
such as clam chowder, bisque, gumbo, and laksa that were baked with
their roux-based sauces and garnished with their corresponding ingredients-we put fish balls and tofu puffs on the laksa sauce, for example.
In some scenarios, we have used modernist twists as toppings, such as
tomato gel cubes, a ponzu sauce thickened with agar and xanthan gum,
and even fried aioli cubes.
Another modernist technique was used to create a pizza cheese
sauce. In traditional mac and cheese, starch particles and milk proteins
act as emulsifiers, which comes at the price of diluting the cheese flavor.
For our pizza cheese sauce (see page 255), we used the silky smooth Mac
and Cheese recipe from Modernist Cuisine at Home with sodium citrate
to keep the water and fat droplets from separating when the cheese
melts. The resulting texture is as smooth as melted American cheese
but as complex and intense in flavor as sharp cheddar. The rich cheese
sauce was baked on both Neapolitan and New York pizzas instead of the
tomato sauce, providing delicious pizzas when garnished with additional
mozzarella cheese and topped with fresh tomatoes and greens.
Gazpacho sauce was another exciting challenge. Knowing that gazpacho is
traditionally uncooked didn't stop us from mimicking this soup and successfully
creating a brightly colored Gazpacho Pizza (see page 3:266).
Neapolitan pizza with Invincible Vinaigrette
(see page 266), sour cream, fresh mozzarella,
and kale
Neapolitan pizza with store-bought tomato
soup (diluted with 5% water), fresh mozzarella, and basil
Neapolitan pizza with store-bought cream
of corn soup (diluted with 20% water), fresh
mozzarella, and basil
Neapolitan pizza with canned pumpkin puree
(diluted with 50% water), fresh mozzarella,
and basil
New York pizza with silken tofu sauce, thickened ponzu sauce garnish, and sliced octopus
New York pizza with Sabayon Sauce (see
page 261), Parmesan, morels, asparagus,
and chives
Neapolitan pizza with Modernist Cheese
Sauce (see page 255), fresh mozzarella,and
basil
New York pizza with chicken jus sauce (see
page 269) and pizza cheese
256
Neapolitan pizza with gazpacho sauce, fresh
mozzarella, cucumbers, Tomato Water Gel
(see page 3:269), onion petals, croutons,
olive oil, vinegar,and chives
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Neapolitan pizza with store-bought pesto
and fresh mozzarella
New York pizza with Aioli (see page 264)
New York pizza with Sous Vide Hollandaise
(see page 260) applied halfway through
baking, and pizza cheese
New York pizza with Amatriciana Sauce (see
page 227) and pizza cheese
New York pizza with store-bought mango
chutney and pizza cheese
New York pizza with Aioli (see page 264) and
pizza cheese
New York pizza with chicken jus sauce (see
page 269) garnish and pizza cheese
Neapolitan pizza with fresh mozzarella and
garnished with Aioli (see page 264)
New York pizza with chicken stock sauce (see
page 269), mascarpone, and pizza cheese
Neapolitan pizza with heavy cream and fresh
mozzarella
New York pizza with Invincible Vinaigrette
(see page 266), pizza cheese, and spinach
New York pizza with Modernist Cheese Sauce
(see page 255), spinach, and sliced cherry
tomatoes
New York pizza with store-bought korma
sauce and pizza cheese
New York pizza with Sabayon Sauce (see
page 261), Parmesan, garlic, razor clams,
Manila clams, geoduck clam, extra-virgin
olive oil, and parsley
New York pizza with store-bought pesto and
pizza cheese
Detroit-style pizza with Modernist Cheese
Sauce (see page 255), Wisconsin brick
cheese, and pizza cheese
Detroit-style pizza with chicken jus sauce
(see page 269), Wisconsin brick cheese, and
pizza cheese
Detroit-style pizza with store-bought
vindaloo (thickened with 3% Ultra-Tеx 3),
Wisconsin brick cheese, and pizza cheese
Detroit-style pizza with gazpacho sauce,
Wisconsin brick cheese, pizza cheese,
cucumbers, Tomato Water Gel (see page
3:269), onion petals, croutons, olive oil,
vinegar, and chives
SAUCE 257
8
EMULSION-BASED SAUCES
Many of the foods you see every day are emulsions:
hot dogs and Mountain Dew, chocolate and ice
cream, mayonnaise and milk. Each of these foods
contains a fat mixed with a water-based solution in
such a way that the two mingle without separating.
There are two stages of emulsification. The first
stage, when you disperse oil in water (or vice versa)
to homogenize the two, is called a primary emulsion.
In this stage the droplets are fairly coarse. The next
stage, when an initial emulsion is beaten to further
decrease the size of the dispersed droplets, is called
a secondary emulsion. Every rule about emulsions
has its exceptions, but generally speaking, if you
have enough emulsifier, the smaller you make the
droplets, the more stable the emulsion becomes and
the longer it lasts.
A primary emulsion can be made with a whisk,
but you'll have pretty large droplets that won't hold
up for very long. To make a longer-lasting secondary
emulsion, you'll need a lot more energy behind the
effort. A typical countertop blender or immersion
blender can create an emulsion with droplets as
small as about 10 microns / 0.0004 in. It will feel
smooth and less greasy on your tongue and be perfectly acceptable for many cooking purposes. A food
processor is another common tool for emulsifying,
although it produces slightly coarser emulsions than
a blender does because the food processor has larger
blades and a slower rotation speed.
It can be challenging to create sturdy oil-water
emulsions without the stabilizing properties of
dairy or eggs. Vinaigrettes are perhaps the most
familiar example. They are good visual paradigms of
how emulsions both work and fail. Shake or whisk
vinegar and oil with some mustard, garlic, and herbs,
and you will create an emulsion, but it may fail in a
matter of minutes. If you whirl the vinaigrette in a
blender or mixer, the droplets will be smaller and
better dispersed, and the recipe might stay combined
for a day or two. Add an emulsifier like PGA to your
recipe, and the same ratio of oil and vinegar will
remain emulsified much longer. The same principles
for combining fat and water can be used to blend
endless combinations of other ingredients.
Be careful not to let the emulsion get too warm.
The mechanical energy used to break up the droplets
also produces friction-and thus heat. It can be all too
easy to overheat the ingredients, leading to a broken
or overcooked emulsion. We generally recommend
adding these sauces to pizza after baking so that they
don't break. The exceptions are the Sabayon Sauce
on page 261, which can be applied during baking and
toasted as it bakes, and the Ultrastable Beurre Blanc
on page 261, which lives up to its name.
We use Sabayon Sauce (see page 261) to
protect delicate seafood, like the clams on the
pizza shown on the previous page, from the
blistering heat of the pizza oven. It acts as a
thermal barrier and helps prevent them from
overcooking.
You don't need a whipping siphon to
make emulsion-based sauces.We like
it because it's super convenient during
service, it lets us keep the product
warm, and the foaminess allows you to
build volume instead of having a dense,
super-rich sauce.
SAUCE
Renowned chefs such as Wolfgang Puck at Spago
and Matt Hyland at Emmy Squared often use aioli
or ranch to top off their pizzas after they come
out of the oven. Emulsion-based sauces add
richness as well as an acidity that balances the
flavors in the pizzas that they make.
259
8
SOUS VIDE HOLLANDAISE
INSPIRED BY DANIEL HUMM
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING%
Dry white wine 130 g 1/½ cup +1 Tbsp 130
Shallots, finely minced 65 g 1/4 cup + 3 Tbsp 65
White vinegar 45 g 3 Tbsp 45
Egg yolks, large 100 g 5 ea 100
Water (or stock) 25 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 25
Unsalted butter, melted 290 g 11/3 cups 290
Fine salt 5g 34 tsp +/a tsp 5
Malic acid 1.3 g 14 tsp + 8 tsp 1
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 15 min/
Inactive 40 min
~450 g
In addition to being one of the most versatile emulsion sauces in the book, sous vide hollandaise is also
one of the most delicious. We highly recommend
that you use it in place of the tomato sauce in the
Detroit-Style Pizza on page 3:109.The combination
is a game changer that might have you rethinking the
best sauce for the classic red-top pizza.
PROCEDURE
1 Combine the wine, shallots, and vinegar
in a small saucepot, and reduce over
medium-high heat until syrupy.
2 Strain. Measure 30 g ofthe strained reduction, and cool to room temperature.
3 Blend the egg yolks and water with the
reduction using an immersion blender.
This hollandaise sauce is heat stable and can be
used on many different styles of pizza. In some
instances, it can be applied prior to baking or
halfway through baking, which will make its
surface brown. It can also be applied after baking.
4 Vacuum seal.
5 Cook sous vide in a 65° C/149° F water bath
for 30 min.
6 Transfer the cooked egg mixture to a tall
cup, and blend in the butter, salt, and malic
acid using an immersion blender. Adjust the
seasoning if necessary.
If you choose to use stock rather than water, consider the ingredient for which the hollandaise is
being prepared: use fish stock for fish, poultry
stock for poultry, and so on. For stock recipes,
see page 268.
7 Transfer to a 1 L whipping siphon.
8 Charge the whipping siphon with 2 nitrous
oxide charges, and shake well.
9 Hold the whipping siphon in a 60°C/
140°F water bath for up to 3 h. Discard any
leftovers.
Alternatively, the hollandaise base can be cooked
sous vide in a 63°C/145° F water bath to produce
a lighter foam, or in a slightly warmer 67°C/153° F
water bath for a denser foam.
IMMERSION BLENDER HOLLANDAISE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Dry white wine 100 g 13 cup +2 Tbsp 133.33
Shallots, thinly sliced 50 g 13 cup 66.67
☑
Active 15 min/
Inactive 40 min
~345 g
White vinegar 35 g 31/½ Tbsp 46.67
Egg yolks, large 75 g 4 ea 100
Water 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 26.67
This recipe will produce a result that is nearly
identical to the sous vide hollandaise above
but doesn't require a whipping siphon. Unsalted butter, melted 225 g 1 cup 300
Fine salt 4g 3/4 tsp 5.33
Malicacid 1g 14 tsp 1.33 For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
1
PROCEDURE
Combine the wine, shallots, and vinegar
in a small saucepot, and reduce over
medium-high heat until syrupy.
2 Strain. Measure 20 g of the strained reduction, and cool to room temperature.
3 Blend the egg yolks and water with the
reduction using an immersion blender.
4 Vacuum seal.
5 Cook sous vide in a 65°C/149° F water bath
for 30 min.
6 Transfer the cooked egg mixture to a tall
cup, and blend in the butter, salt, and malic
acid using an immersion blender. Adjust the
seasoning if necessary.
7 Hold in a 60°C/140° F water bath for up to
3 h. Discard any leftovers.
New York square pizza with hollandaise
sauce, pizza cheese, and baby artichokes
260 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SABAYON SAUCE
New York pizza with sabayon
sauce, Parmesan, morels,
asparagus, and chives
TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMEЕ SCALING %
Flavored liquid*, 21° C/70°F 230 g 1 cup 100
Egg yolks, large 120 g 6 ea 52.17
Active 5-10 min/
Inactive 30 min
~350 g
Fine salt 2.3 g 14 tsp + /a tsp 1
*This liquid needs to be veryflavorful and aromatic. It is usually a reduction ofwine with shallots,
spices, and herbs.
PROCEDURE
1 Blend the flavored liquid, egg yolks, and salt
with an immersion blender until smooth.
3 Cook sous vide in a 70° C/158° F water bath
for 30 min.
2 Vacuum seal.
This sabayon is one of our favorites because it adds a
layer of richness and creaminess to the finished pizza
but is light at the same time. The recipe's ratio allows
you to customize it for virtually any flavor profile.
4 Transfer the egg mixture to a 1 L whipping
siphon.
ULTRASTABLE BEURRE BLANC
Apply to the pizzas halfway through or after
baking. You can also toast the sabayon after
applying it to pizza.
5 Charge the whipping siphon with 3 nitrous
oxide charges, and shake well.
6 Hold the whipping siphon in a 55° C/131° F
water bath for up to 3 h. Discard any
leftovers.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Agar 1g 1/4 tsp + 1a tsp 0.4
Propylene glycol alginate (PGA) 1g 14 tsp + 1/8 tsp 0.4 Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 30 min
~550 g
Water, stock, or heavy cream, cold 250 g 1 cup +1 Tbsp 100
Dry white wine 250 g 1 cup +1 Tbsp 100 Apply to the pizzas before or after baking.
Champagne vinegar 75 g 1/3 cup 30
Shallots, finely minced 75 g 1/½ cup 30
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323. Unsalted butter 250 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 100
Liquid soy lecithin 2.5 g 1/2 tsp 1
Fine salt 5 g 3/4 tsp + 1/8 tsp 2
Lemon juice as needed
PROCEDURE
1 Stir together the agar and PGA.
2 Put the water in a small saucepot and whisk
the agar-PGA mixture into the water.
3 Heat over medium-high heat to 95° C/
203° F.
4 Transfer to a container, and cool until fully
set, about 10 min.
5 Puree to a fluid gel consistency using an
immersion blender. Set aside.
6 Combine the wine, vinegar, and shallots
in a small saucepot, and reduce over
medium-high heat until syrupy.
7 Strain. Measure 50 g of the strained reduction and cool to room temperature.
8 Melt the butter in another small saucepot
over medium heat.
9 Whisk in the soy lecithin.
10 Add the salt, lemon juice, and reserved
wine reduction to the fluid gel, and blend
using an immersion blender.
11 Slowly pour in the melted butter mixture
while blending until fully emulsified.
12 Adjust the seasoning if necessary.
13 Hold in a water bath at 55° C/131° F for up
to 3 h. Discard any leftovers.
SAUCE 261
8
MAYONNAISE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Egg yolks, large 100 g 5 ea 25
Active 6 min ~530 g
Lemon juice 30 g 2 Tbsp 7.5
Fine salt 4g 3/4 tsp
Champagne vinegar 2g 1/2 tsp 0.5 Apply to the pizzas after baking.
Neutral oil 400 g 134 cups +2 Tbsp 100
PROCEDURE
1 Blend the egg yolks, lemon juice, salt, and
vinegar in a tall cup using an immersion
blender or in a countertop blender until
smooth.
2 While blending, slowly drizzle in the oil in
a thin, steady stream. Make sure to move
the blender head around while you are
pouring in the oil if using an immersion
blender. If using a countertop blender,
blend on medium-high speed.
3 Adjust the seasoning if necessary.
4 Store for up to 3 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
MODERNIST MAYONNAISE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Egg yolks, large 45 g
2 ea 15
Water 75 g 13 cup 25
Active 5 min/
Inactive 30 min
~440 g
Dijon mustard 21 g 1 Tbsp +114 tsp 7
Xanthan gum 0.7g 14 tsp 0.23
Grapeseed oil 300 g 1/3 cups 100
Fine salt as needed
Apply to the pizzas after baking.
This recipe was adapted from Modernist Cuisine at Home.
PROCEDURE
1 Vacuum seal the egg yolks.
2 Cook sous vide in a 67° C/153° F water bath
for 30 min.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
3 Whisk together the water, mustard, and
xanthan gum, and puree using an immersion blender with the cooked egg yolks
until smooth.
4 Drizzle the oil slowly into the egg mixture
while blending until fully emulsified.
5 Season with 1% salt by weight or as needed.
6 Store for up to 3 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
Brazilian thin-crust pizza with shrimp,
pesto, and mayonnaise
262 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
ARUGULA MAYONNAISE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Arugula 150 g 72 cups 60
Garlic Confit 100 g 1/2 cup 40 Active 10 min/
Inactive 5-10 min
~450 g
see page 366
Egg yolks, large 40 g 2 ea 16
Extra-virgin olive oil 250 g 1 cup + 2 Tbsp 100 Apply to the pizzas after baking.
Fine salt as needed
Lemon juice as needed
PROCEDURE
1 Bring a large pot of heavily salted water to a
boil.
2 Blanch the arugula in the boiling water until
tender, about 1 min. Transfer to an ice bath,
and cool completely.
3 Drain the arugula and transfer to a blender.
4 Puree until smooth.
Artisan pizza with arugula
mayonnaise, goat cheese, fava
beans, lemon zest, and goat cheesestuffed fried squash blossoms
5 Pass the puree through a fine-mesh sieve
and measure. You'll need about 100 g (13
cup) of puree.
6 Puree the garlic confit and egg yolks in a
blender until smooth.
7 With the blender on high, slowly drizzle in
the oil in a thin, steady stream, occasionally
pausing to scrape down the sides of the
blender with a silicone spatula.
8 When the oil has been incorporated,
reduce the blender to low speed, and add
the arugula puree.
9 Blend in the salt and lemon juice. Adjust the
seasoning if necessary.
10 Store for up to 3 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze. Allow to come to room temperature
before using.
8
AIOLI TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Egg yolks, large 40 g
2 ea 17.78
Active 5-7 min ~500 g
Lemon juice 10 g 2 tsp 4.44
Garlic clove, peeled 6g 1 ea 2.67
Fine salt 4g 3/4 tsp 1.78 Apply to the pizzas after baking.
Vegetable oil 225 g 1 cup 100
Extra-virgin olive oil 225 g 1 cup 100
To make garlic confit aioli, replace the garlic
clove with garlic confit (see page 366).
PROCEDURE
1 Blend the egg yolks, lemon juice, garlic, and
salt in a tall cup using an immersion blender
or countertop blender until smooth.
2 Combine the oils.
WASABI AIOLI
3 While blending, slowly drizzle in the oils
in a thin, steady stream. Make sure to move
the blender head around while you are
pouring in the oil if using an immersion
blender. If using a blender, blend on
medium-high speed.
Add 30 g (2 Tbsp) fresh wasabi (or 7 g [2 Tbsp] wasabi powder), grated
directly into the aioli, and stir well to incorporate. You can substitute
prepared horseradish for the fresh wasabi if desired. You can apply the
amounts from this variation to either aioli recipe in this chapter.
MILK AIOLI (EGGLESS AIOLI)
4 Adjust the seasoning if necessary.
5 Store for up to 3 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
GOCHUJANG AIOLI
Add 45 g (2 Tbsp + /½ tsp) gochujang and stir well. You can use other hot
sauces and add them to taste. You can apply the amounts from this variation to either aioli recipe in this chapter.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Whole milk, cold 155 g 2/3 cup 100
Active 5-7 min ~500 g
Garlic cloves, peeled 9g 1-2 ea 5.81
Fine salt 3g 1/½ tsp 1.94
Vegetable oil 215 g 1 cup 138.71
Extra-virgin olive oil 110 g 1/2 cup 70.97
Aioli looks similar to mayonnaise, and this one does,
too, but it is very white because it doesn't contain eggs.
Apply to the pizzas after baking.
PROCEDURE
1 Blend the milk, garlic, and salt in a tall cup
using an immersion blender or countertop
blender until smooth.
2 Combine the oils.
3 While blending, slowly drizzle in the oils
in a thin, steady stream. Make sure to move
the blender head around while you are
pouring in the oil if using an immersion
blender. If using a blender, blend on
medium-high speed.
4 Adjust the seasoning if necessary.
5 Store for up to 2 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
The milk aioli is one of the easiest recipes to
make in this chapter, and this sauce brings so
much to the table. It has a long shelf life and it
works incredibly well as a canvas for other flavors. This sauce also holds well after you apply it
to something hot.
Artisan pizza with aioli, blistered shishito
peppers, and toasted almonds
264
While we don't offer vegan emulsion sauce
recipes (such as a vegan mayonnaise or aioli),
we tested Vegenaise to see if it could be a good
substitute. We pureed garlic into it to make a
vegan aioli (of sorts) as well as blended it with
wasabi and gochujang, and it performed just
like a regular mayonnaise. We also applied it to
hot pizzas after baking and it held up pretty well.
If you follow a vegan diet or if you have vegan
guests, this is a very good replacement for the
non-vegan counterparts.
INVINCIBLE VINAIGRETTE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Champagne vinegar 80 g 3 cup 80 Active 5-10 min ~325 g
Quince vinegar 35 g 2/½ Tbsp 35
Pearjuice 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 20
Dijon mustard 5g 1 tsp 5g
Propylene glycol alginate (PGA) 0.98 g 1/4 tsp 0.98
Extra-virgin olive oil 100 g 13 cup+ 2 Tbsp 100
Pistachio oil 55 g 14 cup 55
Walnut oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 30
Liquid soy lecithin 1.85 g 1/½ tsp 1.85
Fine salt as needed
Use this recipe as a template for any basic vinaigrette. Different oils and acids can be used to
create a variety of effects. The vinaigrette is completely heat stable, so it can be made with animal
fats or dairy fat for use in warm salads, eggs, and
cooked meats.
This recipe was adapted from Modernist Cuisine
at Home.
1
PROCEDURE
Combine the vinegars, pear juice, mustard,
and PGA in a small saucepot, and bring the
mixture to 60° C/140° F over medium heat.
2 Using an immersion blender, blend over the
heat until the ingredients are completely
incorporated. Remove from the heat.
3 Combine the oils.
4 Drizzle the oils and soy lecithin slowly into
the vinegar mixture while blending; process
until emulsified.
5 Blend in the salt.
6 Store for up to 3 mo in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
266 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Artisan pizza with barbecue sauce,
smoked provolone, pulled pork, and
pickled Peppadew peppers
BARBECUE SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING % ☑
Malt vinegar 200 g 34 cup + 2 Tbsp 50
White Beef Stock 200 g 34 cup + 2 Tbsp 50
Active 5 min/
Inactive 10 min
~480 g
see page 268
Maple syrup 100 g 14 cup + 1 Tbsp 25
Yellow onion, finely diced 60 g 1/4 cup +2 Tbsp 15
Bourbon 54 g 14 cup 13.5 For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
Rendered bacon fat 50 g 3 Tbsp +1 tsp 12
Sherry vinegar 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 5
Smoked Hungarian paprika, or
other ground smoked pepper
20 g 3 Tbsp +1 tsp 5
Cayenne pepper 2g 1 tsp 0.5
Yellow mustard powder 2g 1 tsp 0.5
Liquid hickory smoke 0.4 g n/a 0.1
Freeze-dried tomatoes 80 g 4 cups 20
Microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel
CG 200 or FMC BioPolymer)
4g 1 tsp 1
Fine salt as needed
Red wine vinegar as needed
1
PROCEDURE
Combine the malt vinegar, stock, maple
syrup, onion, bourbon, bacon fat, sherry
vinegar, paprika, cayenne, mustard powder,
and liquid smoke in a medium saucepot.
2 Cook the mixture over low heat until
reduced by half, to about 400 g.
3 Transfer to a blender, and puree until
smooth.
4 Pass through a fine-mesh sieve.
6 Blend the tomatoes and microcrystalline
cellulose into the cooled sauce base until
evenly distributed and smooth.
5 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
Measure 400 g of the sauce base.
7 Add the salt and red wine vinegar.
8 Store for up to 3 mo in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
SAUCE 267
PARAMETRIC RECIРE
STOCKS, SOUPS, AND PASTA
SAUCES AS PIZZA SAUCE
When we started examining the options for pizza
sauces, we knew we wanted to go beyond the typical
sauces that you would find on pizzeria menus. We
fully appreciate traditional pizza sauces such as
tomato, pesto, and alfredo (and even some of the
BEST BETS FOR STOCK
previously novel but now standard sauces, like
barbecue sauce). But we couldn't resist the idea of
transforming broths into sauces or deconstructing
soups and pasta sauces into components that add
extraordinary flavor and interest to pizzas.
Stock Fat Scaling %
Bone Scaling %
Meat Scaling %
Chicken Frying oil 8 Wings 40 Ground chicken 75
Beef Suet 5 Calf's foot, split 20 Ground beef 80
Veal Frying oil 5 Veal knuckle 50 Ground veal 25
Lamb Frying oil 5 Lamb shoulder and neck 35 Ground lamb 100
Pork Frying oil 7.5 Pork ribs 50 Ground pork 50
Shellfish Clarified unsalted butter 5 Lobster, shrimp, or crab shells
and heads
65 Squid or scallop meat,
optional
20
Vegetable Vegetable oil 5 n/a n/a
Fish Olive oil 10 Fish bones 100 n/a
*For brown stock only
HOW TO Make Basic Stock
Scale all other ingredients relative to the water weight. For every 1 kg
of water, for example, use 400 g of chicken wings and 750 g of ground
chicken meat for chicken stock. Although the amount of water used is
the biggest factor in the yield, the moisture of the ingredients used, the
1 Weigh the cold liquids.
2 Prepare stock ingredients.
3 Mix vegetables and aromatics (see Best
Bets for Stock Aromatics on page 270).
WHITE STOCK
1 Follow steps 1 and 2. For the preparation
step, blanch bones, if using, instead of
roasting, by covering the bones in cold
water and bringing to a boil.
2 In step 3, sweat the stock ingredients and
aromatics in fat (see Best Bets for Stock
Aromatics on page 270).
3 Follow steps 4 and 5 in the method above.
4
cooking time, and the cooking method all affect the yield. The table
lists suggested cooking methods, times, and temperatures. If pressurecooking, set the pressure shown on the gauge to 1 bar/15 psi.
Add stock ingredients and water and proceed with the cooking instructions in the
Best Bets for Stock table above.
SHELLFISH STOCK
1 Follow steps 1 and 2. For the preparation
step, sauté shellfish, aromatics, and tomato
paste in fat on stove top (see Best Bets for
Stock Aromatics on page 270).
2 Follow steps 4 and 5 in the method above.
5
Rest until pressure cooker has depressurized, about 20 min. Strain.
1
RICH BROWN STOCK
Follow steps 1 and 2. For the preparation
step, roast meat, bones, and vegetables
(see Best Bets for Stock Aromatics on page
270). Cook at 190°C/375°F for the time
indicated in the table. Add tomato paste if
desired.
2 Deglaze the roasting pan. Use wine or
water.
3 Combine aromatics with roasted
ingredients.
4 Follow steps 4 and 5 in the method above.
268 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
We did extensive experiments to develop these
recipes and the methods to turn any soup or sauce
into a pizza sauce.
Soups work as a sauce as long as the consistency is
right, but keep in mind that soups that are quite thick
when they are cold-such as gumbo, clam chowder,
bisque, or other starch-thickened soups-become
much thinner when they get heated in the oven. For
this reason, we suggest thickening starch-based soups
even a little more before applying them cold onto
the dough. You can blend in 3%–4% Ultra-Tex 3 or
0.2% xanthan gum (based on total sauce weight,
not scaling).
Ifyou want to go the extra mile, we suggest using
the liquid soup part as the sauce and the solids from
the soup as toppings. With clam chowder, for example, keep the raw clams, crispy bacon, and cooked
potatoes separate. Sauce the pizza with the soup,
apply cheese, then place the toppings on the cheese
and bake.
Cooked stocks must be used immediately or chilled quickly to prevent
bacteria growth.
An instapot is a great option to pressure
cook your stock.
Liquid Scaling % Preparation (brown stock only) Η Cook H °C F
Water 100 roast meat and bones 1/2 pressure-cook 112 n/a n/a
Water 100 roast meat and bones 1 pressure-cook 2/2 n/a n/a
Red wine* 10
Water 100 roast meat 3/4 pressure-cook 21/2 n/a n/a
Madeira 15
Water 100 roast meat 1 pressure-cook 11/2 n/a n/a
Water 100 roast meat and bones 1 pressure-cook 2 n/a n/a
Dry white port 8
Water 100 fry shells with tomato paste 10 min cook sous vide 3/4 88 190
until golden brown Dry vermouth 15
Water 100 sauté sliced vegetables
until golden brown
1 cook sous vide 3 85 185
Water 100 roast bones 20 min cook sous vide 114 88 190
White wine 10
STOCK, JUS, AND CONSOMMÉ SAUCЕ
INGREDIENTS
Stock, jus, or consommé, 21°C/70°F 500 g
Ultra-Tex 3 40 g
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
☑
2 cups + 2 Tbsp 100
Active 1-2 min ~540 g
14 cup +3 Tbsp 8
PROCEDURE
1 Place the liquid in a tall cup. 2 Use an immersion blender to blend in the
Ultra-Tex 3 until completely incorporated
and thickened.
3 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
Stocks, jus, and consommé sauces can be used as a sauce base only for New York and artisan pizzas. For
Neapolitan and Detroit-style pizzas, they need to be used as a finishing sauce. As a sauce base, use 160
g (/½ cup +3 Tbsp) for the 35 cm/14 in artisan pizza or 400 g (134 cups) for the 50 cm/20 in New York
pizza, and then apply other toppings, like pizza cheese.As a secondary sauce or garnish for Neapolitan
pizza, drizzle 10 g (1 Tbsp) on the finished pizza with a spoon; for a 50 cm/20 in New York pizza, use 40
g (4 cup). For the 35 cm by 25 cm/14 in by 10 in Detroit-style pizza, pipe 100 g (1½ cup + 2 Tbsp) ofthe
sauce on the finished pizza with a piping bag.
If the base stock isn't salted, season with 1% salt by
weight or as needed.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
SAUCE 269
8
BEST BETS FOR STOCK AROMATICS
Aromatic ingredients provide flavor and aroma notes to complement the base stocks. The variations below are some typical combinations that we like.
Stock Vegetable Scaling % Herb Scaling % Spice Scaling %
Vegetable Onion 33 Parsley 0.75 Black peppercorn 0.1
Carrot 25 Bay leaf 0.01 Coriander seed 0.2
Leek 8 Thyme 0.1 Star anise 0.2
Tomato, peeled and seeded 8 Chive 1 n/a n/a
Celery 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Mushroom 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Poultry Onion 6 Parsley 0.5 Black peppercorn 0.1
Carrot 5 Garlic 1 n/a n/a
Leek 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Meat, beef Onion 10 Thyme 0.8 Star anise 0.05
Carrot 10 Rosemary 0.15 Garlic 1
Celery 2 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Tomato paste (for brown stock) 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Game, lamb Onion 기 Bay leaf 0.01 Star anise 0.2
Carrot 7 Thyme 1 Garlic 2
Celery 2 Sage 0.2 Black peppercorn 0.2
Shellfish Carrot 5 Parsley 0.25 Fennel seed 0.01
Onion 5 Thyme 0.1 Saffron 0.005
Leek 2 Basil 0.2 n/a n/a
Fennel 2 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Button mushroom 2 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Tomato paste (for brown stock) 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Fish Carrot 33 Garlic 2 n/a n/a
Onion 26 n/a n/a Star anise 0.3
Leek 13 n/a n/a Coriander seed 0.2
Fennel 13 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Tomato paste (for brown stock) 5 n/a n/a n/a n/a
BOLOGNESE SAUCE
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Ground pork 125 g n/a 54.35
Olive oil 10 g 214 tsp 4.35
Onions, large dice 75 g 1/½ cup 32.61
Carrots, medium dice 45 g 3 cup 19.57
Garlic, minced 6g 2 tsp 2.61
Canned crushed tomatoes 230 g 1 cup 100
Porcini mushroom powder 3g 11/½ tsp 1.3
Heavy cream 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 8.7
Fine salt 5 g 3/4 tsp +/a tsp 2.17
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 5-10 min/ ~500 g
Inactive 45 min
If using an instapot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1-3.
Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 30 min. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-cook the sauce. When the
instapot has depressurized, proceed with steps 6-8.
This recipe was adapted from Modernist Cuisine
at Home.
1
PROCEDURE
Brown the pork in the oil in the base of a
pressure cooker over medium-high heat,
4-5 min, stirring frequently.
2 Add the onions, carrots, and garlic, and
sweat until tender, 2-3 min, stirring
frequently.
270
3 Stir in the tomatoes and mushroom powder. Put the lid on the pressure cooker.
4 Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure of 1 bar /
15 psi for 45 min; start timing when full pressure is reached.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
5 Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
6 Stir the cream and salt into the sauce.
7 Adjust the seasoning if necessary. Cool to
room temperature over an ice bath.
8 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
PUTTANESCA SAUCE Artisan pizza with puttanesca sauce
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Garlic, minced 15 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 4
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Olive oil 20 g 1 Tbsp +1½ tsp 5.33
☑
Olives, pitted and sliced 3 mm thick
Capers
60 g 14 cup +3 Tbsp 16
30 g 2 Tbsp 8
Active 10 min ~500 g
Anchovy fillets (oil-packed), drained and
finely minced
48 1 ea 1.07
Crushed red pepper flakes 0.6 g 14 tsp 0.16
Canned crushed tomatoes 375 g 11/½ cups 100
PROCEDURE
1 Lightly sweat the garlic in the olive oil in a
medium saucepot over medium heat, about
1 min, stirring frequently.
2 Add the olives, capers, anchovies, and red
pepper flakes, and lightly sweat, 1-2 min,
stirring frequently.
3 Add the tomatoes, and simmer until the
sauce has thickened to a paste, 7-8 min.
4 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
5 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
BAGNA CAUDA SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Anchovy fillets (oil-packed), drained 90 g 23-24 ea 100
Unsalted butter 50 g 3½ Tbsp 55.56 Active 5-10 min/
Inactive 10-15 min
~250 g
Extra-virgin olive oil 50 g 3½ Tbsp 55.56
Garlic cloves, peeled 55 g
18-20 ea 61.11
Clam juice 75 g 14 cup + 1 Tbsp 83.33
Dry white wine 50 g 3 Tbsp + 1 tsp 55.56
Fresh chives, minced 5g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 5.56
Fresh thyme, minced 2.5 g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 2.78
Xanthan gum 0.35 g 18 tsp 0.39
Bagna cauda means "hot bath" in Italian. It's the
name for the mix of ingredients typically used to
simmer shellfish.
We highly recommend pairing our bagna cauda
with seafood toppings or other toppings that
complement fish and seafood. The savory
umami flavors in the sauce amplify the flavors
found in seafood.
1
PROCEDURE
Finely chop the anchovies, then smash
them to forma paste.
2 Combine the anchovy paste with the butter
and olive oil in a small saucepot.
3 Grate the garlic cloves over the pan using a
box grater or Microplane.
4 Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly,
until the butter is melted and the garlic is
fragrant.
5 Reduce the heat to medium low, and allow
to cook for 2 more min.
6 Add the clam juice, wine, chives, and
thyme, and cook until reduced by a third.
7 Whisk in the xanthan gum.
8 Keep warm for up to 3 h so the butter
doesn't solidify.
9 Store for up to 1 wk in refrigeration. Reheat
to melt before using. Freeze for up to 3 mo.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
SAUCE 271
8
ALFREDO SAUСЕ TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Garlic, minced 15 g 1 Tbsp +2 tsp 3.85
Unsalted butter 35 g 21/½ Tbsp 8.97
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 20-25 min
~500 g
All-purpose flour 35 g 13 cup 8.97
Whole milk, cold 390 g 12/3 cups 100
Parmesan, grated 40 g 13 cup + 1 Tbsp 10.26
Some of the water might separate from the sauce
in storage (you will see a thin film on the surface).
Whisk the sauce to reincorporate the water.
Fine salt 4g 3/4 tsp 1.03
Cayenne pepper 0.1g 0.03
*You can approximate this small amount of cayenne pepper by measuring s tsp and dividing it
into three equal parts. Use one part to make the sauce.
PROCEDURE
1 Lightly sweat the garlic in the butter in a
medium saucepot over medium heat, about
1 min, stirring frequently.
2 Add the flour, and cook until light brown,
2-3 min, whisking constantly.
3 Add the milk in a steady stream, and whisk
until incorporated.
4 Bring to a boil over medium heat while
whisking, then turn the heat down to
medium low.
5 Simmer, stirring occasionally, until the
sauce thickens, about 20 min.
6 Whisk in the Parmesan, salt, and cayenne
until fully incorporated. Adjust the seasoning if necessary.
7 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
8 Cover the sauce with plastic wrap pressed
directly over the surface to prevent a skin
from forming.
9 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
CARBONARA SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Garlic, minced 15 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 4.55
Unsalted butter 25 g 1 Tbsp + 24 tsp 7.58
Active 10-15 min/
Inactive 20-25 min
~500 g
All-purpose flour 25 g 3 Tbsp +1 tsp 7.58
Whole milk, cold 330 g 11/½ cups +2 Tbsp 100
Rendered bacon lardons 70 g 1/½ cup + 2 Tbsp 21.21
Parmesan, grated 35 g 13 cup 10.61
Fine salt 3.3 g 1/½ tsp +s tsp 1
Ground black pepper 1.5 g 1/½ tsp + 1% tsp 0.45
1
PROCEDURE
Lightly sweat the minced garlic in the butter
in a medium saucepan over medium heat,
about 1 min, stirring frequently.
2 Add the flour, and cook until light brown,
2-3 min, whisking constantly.
3 Add the milk in a steady stream, and whisk
until incorporated.
We use this sauce on our Carbonara Pizza (see
page 3:189). Carbonara sauce typically contains raw
eggs and is usually added to hot cooked pasta just
before it is served. In order for this sauce to hold,
we had to keep the eggs separate. The carbonara
sauce is spread over the pizza dough and baked.
4 Bring to a boil over medium heat while
whisking, then turn the heat down to
medium low.
5 Simmer, stirring occasionally, until the
sauce thickens, about 20 min.
6 Whisk in the lardons, Parmesan, salt, and
pepper until fully incorporated. Adjust the
seasoning if necessary.
Once the pizza comes out of the oven we add a soft
egg just before serving. You can also drizzle with
Egg Yolk Sauce (see next page) instead. Doing it this
way keeps the eggs from overcooking and evokes
carbonara pasta.
7 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
8 Cover the sauce with plastic wrap pressed
directly over the surface to prevent a skin
from forming.
9 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
Some of the water might separate from the sauce
in storage (you will see a thin film on the surface).
Whisk the sauce to reincorporate the water.
272 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EGG YOLK SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Egg yolks, large 200 g 10 ea 100 Active 5 min/
Inactive 45 min
~200 g
PROCEDURE
1 Whisk the egg yolks together.
2 Vacuum seal.
3 Cook sous vide in a 67°C/153°F water bath
for 45 min.
4 Cool to room temperature.
5 Reserve in a piping bag or squeeze bottle
for use.
6 Hold at room temperature for up to 3 h.
Discard any leftovers.
This sauce should always be applied once the pizza
comes out of the oven. The yolks are cooked in a
67°C/153°F water bath to just set. Ifthey get any
hotter, their texture will change and harden instead
of being creamy and smooth.
8
CACIO E PEPE SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INSPIRED BY STEFANO CALLEGARI
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Active 5-10 min ~650 g
Wondra flour 8 g 1 Tbsp + 1/4 tsp 5.33
Xanthan gum 1.35 g 1/2 tsp 0.9
Water 225 g 1 cup 150
Unsalted butter 150 g 2/3 cup 100
Cracked black pepper 2g 3/4 tsp +1/8 tsp 1.33
Pecorino Romano cheese, finely grated 300 g 3 cups 200
If you want a looser sauce, simply mix in heavy
cream in small additions until you reach the desired
consistency.
For more on purified ingredients, see page 1:323.
PROCEDURE
1 Blend the Wondra flour and xanthan gum
together. Sprinkle the mixture over the
water while blending with an immersion
blender. Set aside.
2 Melt the butter in a medium saucepot over
medium heat until the butter solids turn
brown.
3 Whisk in the Wondra mixture and the
pepper.
4 Stir in the cheese to melt completely.
5 Keep at 21°C/70° F for up to 3 h.
6 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
LAKSA SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Laksa paste 110 g 1/½ cup 15.71
Toasted sesame oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 1/4 tsp 2.14
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 45 min-1h
~700 g
Chicken stock 700 g 3 cups 100
Coconut milk, full-fat 200 g 3/4 cup +1 Tbsp 28.57
Palm sugar, minced 30 g 2 Tbsp + 1 tsp 4.29
Unsalted butter 50 g 1/4 cup 714
All-purpose flour 50 g 1/3 cup +1 Tbsp 714
Fine salt 3g 1/2 tsp 0.43
This recipe yields a lot more than some of the others
in this chapter, and the reason is simple. If you're
going through the trouble of procuring all of these
ingredients (some of them may be specialized) and
spending the time to make the sauce, you might as
well make a large batch and freeze the leftovers.
1
PROCEDURE
Sauté the paste in the oil in a medium
saucepot over medium heat until lightly
caramelized, 5-7 min, stirring occasionally.
2 Deglaze with the chicken stock.
3 Simmer to meld the flavors, about 10 min.
4 Remove from the heat, and stir in the cocоnut milk and palm sugar.
5 Cool to room temperature. Measure 600 g
of the liquid.
6 Combine the butter and flour in a small
saucepot.
7 Cook over medium heat, whisking ocсаsionally, to make a pale-brown roux, about
7 min.
8 Pour the cooled sauce base over the hot
roux and bring to a boil, whisking
constantly.
9 Reduce the heat and simmer to thicken the
sauce, 25-30 min, then remove from the
heat.
10 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
11 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
12 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
If you do not want to thicken the sauce with a roux,
you can replace the butter and flour with 7.2 g (1 Tbsp
+1½ tsp) low-acyl gellan gum. Sprinkle it on top of
the cooled sauce base in step 5. Let it hydrate for3-5
min, and then whisk it in. Bring the sauce base to a
boil, whisking constantly. Season to taste with salt.
Chillover an ice bath until fully set into a gel. Blend
the set gel into a puree. The pureed sauce is best
used at room temperature.
New York pizza with laksa sauce, shrimp, fish
balls, tofu puffs, cilantro, and scallions
BISQUE SAUCE
TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Onions, sliced 100 g 3/4 cup + 2 Tbsp 13.33
Carrots, sliced 100 g 3/4 cup 13.33 Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 45 min-1h
~950 g
Garlic cloves, sliced 10 g 1-2 ea 1.33
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2
Shrimp, peeled, heads on 500 g n/a 66.67
Tomato paste 10 g 13/4 tsp 1.33
Thyme sprigs 3g 2 ea 0.4
If using an instaspot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1-5.
Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 30 min. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-cook the sauce.When the
instapot has depressurized, proceed with steps 8-16.
Cognac 25 g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 3.33
Water 750 g 314 cups 100
Heavy cream 75 g 13 cup 10
Unsalted butter 70 g 1/3 cup 9.07
All-purpose flour 70 g 1/½ cup + 1 Tbsp 9.07
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp + 8 tsp 0.67
1
PROCEDURE
Sweat the onions, carrots, and garlic in the
oil in the base of a pressure cookerover medium-high heat until tender, 3-4 min,
stirring frequently.
2 Add the shrimp, and cook until pink, 1-2 min,
stirring frequently.
3 Add the tomato paste and thyme sprigs.
Cook until the tomato paste just starts to
stick, about 1 min.
4 Deglaze the cooker with the cognac, and
reduce until almost dry, about 1 min.
5 Add the water, and bring to a boil. Put the lid
on the pressure cooker.
This recipe yields a lot more than some of the
others in this chapter, and the reason is simple.
If you're going through the trouble of procuring
all of these ingredients (some of them may be
specialized) and spending the time to make the
sauce, you might as well make a large batch and
freeze the leftovers.
If you do not want to thicken the sauce with a
roux, you can replace the butter and flour with 6.6
g (1 Tbsp +34 tsp) low-acyl gellan gum. Sprinkle it
on top of the cooled sauce base after adding the
heavy cream in step 9. Let it hydrate for 3-5 min,
and then whisk it in. Bring the sauce base to a boil,
whisking constantly. Season to taste with salt. Chill
over an ice bath until fully set into a gel. Blend the
set gel into a puree. The pureed sauce is best used
at room temperature.
6 Pressure-cook ata gauge pressure of 1 bar/
15 psi for 30 min.
11 Cook over medium heat, whisking occasionally, to make a pale-brown roux, about 7 min.
7 Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
12 Pour the cooled sauce base over the hot
roux and bring to a boil, whisking constantly.
8 Strain. Measure 750 g of the strained liquid,
and let cool.
9 Whisk the cream into the cooled liquid until
fully incorporated.
13 Reduce the heat and simmer to thicken the
sauce, 25-30 min, then remove from the heat.
14 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
15 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath. 10 Combine the butter and flour in a small
saucepot. 16 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze for
up to 3 mo.
New York pizza with bisque sauce,
shrimp, mussels, lobster, and chives
8
GUMBO SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Red bell peppers, sliced 200 g 2 cups 26.6
Onions, sliced 100 g 3/4 cup +2 Tbsp 13.3
Active 30-35 min/
Inactive 1%4-1% h
~1.5 kg
Celery, sliced 100 g 3/4 cup 13.3
Garlic cloves, sliced 10 g 2 ea 1.3
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 14 tsp 2
Shrimp, peeled, heads on 500 g
n/a 66.6
Tomato paste 10 g 134 tsp 1.3
Smoked ham hock 300 g n/a 40
Gumbo filé 3g 3/4 tsp 0.4
Water 750 g 314 cups 100
Unsalted butter 100 g 1/3 cup + 2 Tbsp 12.9
All-purpose flour 100 g 3/4 cup +1 Tbsp 12.9
Fine salt 6g 118 tsp 0.8
This recipe yields a lot more than some of the others in this
chapter, and the reason is simple. If you're going through the
trouble of procuring all of these ingredients (some of them
may be specialized) and spending the time to make the sauce,
you might as well make a large batch and freeze the leftovers.
If you do not want to thicken the sauce with a roux, you can
replace the butter and flour with 7.6 g (1 Tbsp +114 tsp) lowacyl gellan gum. Sprinkle it on top of the cooled sauce base
in step 8. Let it hydrate for 3-5 min, and then whisk it in. Bring
the sauce base to a boil, whisking constantly. Season to taste
with salt. Chill over an ice bath until fully set into a gel. Blend
the set gel into a puree. The pureed sauce is best used at room
temperature.
1
PROCEDURE
Sweat the red peppers, onions, celery, and
garlic in the oil in the base of a pressure
cooker over medium-high heat until tender,
5-6 min, stirring frequently.
2 Add the shrimp, and cook until pink, 1-2
min, stirring frequently.
3 Add the tomato paste, and cook until it just
starts to stick, about 1 min.
4 Add the ham hock and gumbo filé.
5 Add the water, and bring to a boil. Put the
lid on the pressure cooker.
6 Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure of 1 bar/
15 psi for 1 h.
7 Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
8 Strain. Measure 950 g of the strained liquid,
and let cool.
9 Combine the butter and flour in a small
saucepot.
10 Cook over medium heat, whisking occasionally, to make a dark-brown roux, about
10 min.
11 Pour the cooled sauce base over the hot
roux and bring to a boil, whisking
constantly.
12 Reduce the heat and simmer to thicken
the sauce, 25-30 min, then remove from
the heat.
13 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
14 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
15 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
If using an instapot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1-5.
Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 1 h. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-cook the sauce. When the
instapot has depressurized, proceed with steps 8-15.
Artisan pizza with gumbo sauce,
andouille sausage, chicken thigh,
crawfish, and sliced okra
CLAM CHOWDER SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Onions, sliced 250 g 2 cups 71.43
Celery, sliced 125 g 1 cup 35.71
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 45 min-1h
~800 g
Garlic clove, sliced 8 g 1 ea 2.29
Extra-virgin olive oil 15 g 1 Tbsp + 1½ tsp 4.29
Clam juice 350 g 11/½ cups 100
Whole milk 200 g 3/4 cup +2 Tbsp 57.14
Unsalted butter 60 g 14 cup 17.14
If using an instapot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1 and
2. Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 30 min. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-cook the sauce.When the
instapot has depressurized, proceed with steps 5-13.
All-purpose flour 60 g /2 cup 17.14
Fine salt 5g 3/4 tsp + 18 tsp 1.43
1
PROCEDURE
Sweat the onions, celery, and garlic in the
oil in the base of a pressure cooker over
medium-high heat until tender, 5-6 min,
stirring frequently.
2 Add the clam juice, and bring to a boil. Put
the lid on the pressure cooker.
3 Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure of 1 bar/
15 psi for 30 min.
4 Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
This recipe yields a lot more than some of the
others in this chapter, and the reason is simple. If
you're going through the trouble of procuring all of
these ingredients (some of them may be specialized) and spending the time to make the sauce,
you might as well make a large batch and freeze the
leftovers.
If you do not want to thicken the sauce with a roux,
you can replace the butter and flour with 4.4 g (21/2
tsp) low-acyl gellan gum. Sprinkle it on top of the
cooled sauce base after adding the milk in step
6. Let it hydrate for 3-5 min, and then whisk it in.
Bring the sauce base to a boil, whisking constantly.
Season to taste with salt. Chill over an ice bath until
fully set into a gel. Blend the set gel into a puree.
The pureed sauce is best used at room temperature.
5 Strain. Measure 490 g of the strained liquid,
and let cool.
6 Whisk the milk into the cooled liquid until
fully incorporated.
7 Combine the butter and flour in a small
saucepot.
8 Cook over medium heat, whisking occasionally, to make a pale-brown roux, about
7 min.
9 Pour the cooled sauce base over the hot
roux and bring to a boil, whisking
constantly.
10 Reduce the heat and simmer to thicken
the sauce, 25-30 min, then remove from
the heat.
11 Add the salt. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
12 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
13 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
Artisan pizza with clam chowder
sauce, steamed potato slices, sliced
celery, clams, and fresh parsley
8
VEGETABLE- AND FRUIT-BASED SAUCES
The purees featured in the following pages can
add bold flavor and provide the foundation for
imaginative pizzas. We start with a general recipe for
pressure-caramelized vegetable sauce that relies on
a method that we developed when we were writing
Modernist Cuisine. We also use purees to add flavor
and color to a variety of pizza doughs on pages
186-191.
Vegetables are made up of cells with strong walls
that soften at higher temperatures than the cells in
meat do. Vegetables are composed mostly of water,
however, and their temperature normally won't
exceed the boiling point of water (100°C / 212°F)
until they are dried out.
Cooking at elevated pressures gives us a way
around this roadblock because the boiling point rises
in step with the pressure. Even at 120°C/ 250°F,
vegetables in a fully pressurized cooker don't dry out
because they quickly become tender. And because
the air is sealed in, you don't need as much water, so
juices are extracted without becoming diluted.
When we combine the effectiveness of a pressure
cooker with our recipe for pressure-caramelizing
vegetables, we obtain particularly rich results. The
resulting sauce intensifies the caramelization of
sugars and concentrates the flavors through the
alkalinity ofthe baking soda and the heat buildup in
the pressure cooker.
Other recipes included in this section span a
variety of flavors and textures, from a curried onion
sauce to a salsa verde.We'd have to write a separate
book to include every type of vegetable- or fruitbased sauce. You'll find a selection of our favorites in
the coming pages.
PRESSURE-CARAMELIZED VEGETABLE SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Vegetables, such as carrots or other root
vegetables, broccoli, or cauliflower
500 g varies 100
Active 5 min/
Inactive 50 min-1h
~575 g
Unsalted butter 80 g 1/3 cup 16
Baking soda 2.5 g 1/½ tsp 0.5
Fine salt 5g 1 tsp 1
PROCEDURE
1 Prepare your vegetables as you would for
roasting (see page 361).
4
2 Melt the butter in the base of a pressure
cooker over medium-high heat.
3 Add the vegetables and baking soda. Stir so
that the baking soda is evenly incorporated
and the butter coats all of the vegetables.
Put the lid on the pressure cooker.
If the resulting puree is too thin, you can cook it in
the same pot over medium heat to evaporate some
of the moisture; stir frequently to prevent scorching
at the bottom of the pot. If the puree is too thick, you
can make it looser by adding water, heavy cream, or
vegetable stock.
5
6
Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure of 1 bar/
15 psi for 50 min.
Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
Blend the vegetables in the cooker with an
immersion blender. Add half the salt and
taste the sauce. Adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
If using an instapot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1-3.
Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 50 min. Lock the
lid onto the pot and pressure-cook the vegetables.
When the instapot has depressurized, proceed with
steps 6-8.
7 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
8 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
One of our favorite vegetables to use for this method
is carrots.
278 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
New York pizza with pressurecaramelized zucchini sauce,
roasted green and yellow
zucchini, browned butter, sage,
and Parmigiano-Reggiano
PRESSURE-CARAMELIZED ZUCCHINI SAUCE
INSPIRED BY DRY
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Unsalted butter 100 g 1/½ cup 25
Zucchini, thinly sliced 400 g 4 cups 100
Baking soda 2g 1/½ tsp 0.5
Fine salt as needed
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 10 min/
Inactive 30 min
~500 g
PROCEDURE
1 Melt the butter in the base of a pressure
cooker over medium-high heat.
3 Pressure-cook at a gauge pressure of 1 bar/
15 psi for 25 min.
6 Add the salt.
7 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
2 Add the zucchini and baking soda. Stir so
that the baking soda is evenly incorporated
and the butter coats all of the zucchini
slices. Put the lid on the pressure cooker.
4 Depressurize the cooker quickly by running
tepid water over the rim.
8 Store for up to 2 d in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
5 Transfer the contents of the pressure cooker
to a blender, and puree until smooth.
SAUCE
If using an instapot, set to Sauté. Follow steps 1-2.
Switch the instapot to Pressure Cook mode. Select
12 psi (High) and set the time for 50 min. Lock the
lid onto the pot and pressure-cook the sauce.
When the instapot has depressurized, proceed
with the remaining steps.
279
8
CURRIED ONION SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Yellow onions, thinly sliced 720 g 6 cups 100 Active 10-15 min ~825 g
Garlic, minced 20 g 2 Tbsp +2 tsp 2.78
Ginger, minced 20 g 2 Tbsp +2 tsp 2.78
Ghee 60 g 14 cup 8.33 If the resulting sauce is too thick to be spreadable, adjust the consistency with water.
Curry spice mix 24 g 3 Tbsp + 34 tsp 3.33
Fine salt 6g 17% tsp 0.83
PROCEDURE
1 Lightly sweat the onions, garlic, and ginger
in the ghee in a large saucepot over
medium heat, 8-10 min.
2 Add the curry, and sweat until the ghee
starts to separate from the mixture, 2-3 min.
This recipe yields a lot more than some of the others in this
chapter, and the reason is simple. If you're going through the
trouble of procuring all of these ingredients (some of them may
be specialized) and spending the time to make the sauce, you
might as well make a large batch and freeze the leftovers.
3 Transfer to a blender, and puree until
smooth. Add the salt, and adjust the seasoning if necessary.
4 Store for up to 4 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
FRENCH ONION SAUCE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Onions, sliced 575 g 43/4 cups 100
Garlic, minced 10 g 1 Tbsp 1.74
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 10-15 min
~550 g
Olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp 5.22
Fresh thyme leaves 1g 1/ tsp 0.17
Brandy 105 g /2 cup 18.26
Fine salt 6 g 11% tsp 1.04
This delicious sauce mimics the flavors that you
would find in French onion soup. We recommend
pairing it with grated Gruyère and topping it with
toasted Panko bread crumbs to fully flesh out the
flavor profile.
1
PROCEDURE
Lightly brown the onions and garlic in
the olive oil in a medium sauté pan over
medium-high heat, stirring frequently,
10-15 min.
You can leave the sauce as is or make a smooth
onion puree by blending it.
2 Add the thyme, and deglaze with the
brandy. Reduce until dry.
3 Add the salt.
4 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
5 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
Artisan pizza with French onion sauce, toasted
panko crumbs, and Parmigianno-Reggiano
280 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SALSA VERDE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Tomatillos, husks removed 390 g
11 ea 100
Active 20-25 min ~650 g
White onions, quartered 260 g 2 ea 66.67
Jalapeños 65 g 5 ea 16.67
Olive oil 30 g 2 Tbsp + 1/2 tsp 7.69
Fine salt 5g 34 tsp +1/8 tsp 1.28
1
PROCEDURE
Char the tomatillos, onions, and jalapeños
on a hot flattop or large sauté pan over high
heat. (Alternatively, place the vegetables on
a wire rack set over a sheet pan, and char
them using a blowtorch; see page 363.)
2 Stem and seed the jalapeños (you can leave
the seeds in, but this will increase the
spiciness).
3 Combine the tomatillos, onions, and jalapeños in a medium saucepot with the olive
oil. Sweat over medium heat until tender.
4 Blend the sauce with an immersion blender
until smooth.
5 Add the salt, and adjust the seasoning if
necessary.
6 Cool to room temperature over an ice bath.
7 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
Artisan pizza with salsa verde, pizza
cheese, huitlacoche confit, chorizo,
and red peppers
8
CHAPTER 9
CHEESE
1
MILK 286
CHEESE MAKING 290
PREPARING YOUR CHEESE 296
APPLYING CHEESE TO YOUR PIZZA 303
MOZZARELLA 315
RICOTTА 338
CHEESE
It's hard to think of pizza without thinking about
cheese. Sure, there's one very famous and very traditional cheeseless pizza, the Marinara Pizza (see page
3:52), but most of the time, when we eat pizza, we're
expecting cheese. People in the business of marketing pizza know this. That's why you see so many
images of ooey-gooey cheese in pizza advertising.
It's what immediately comes to mind when we're
thinking about the classic New York pizza: biting
into a slice and getting that stretchy and magnificent
"cheese pull."While a cheeseless pizza is fine every
once in a while, we like our cheese. It's got flavor. It's
got texture. And it's very satisfying.
Cheeses can be classified in a number of different
ways. The source of the milk is one way. Whether you
use cow's, buffalo's, sheep's, goat's, or even camel's
milk, it will play a big role in the flavor and texture of
the finished cheese. Cheese can also be classified in
terms of texture: very hard, hard, semihard, semisoft,
or soft. Texture in cheese has a lot to do with moisture
content, which is a very important consideration in
pizza making. Cheeses can also be differentiated in
terms ofthe coagulating agent used (rennet or acid)
and their microflora. Some have internal mold, while
others have surface mold; there may be surface yeasts
and/or bacteria giving cheeses specific aroma and
flavor. Some have propionic acid bacteria (which
helps make the "eyes" in Swiss cheese). Cheeses
can vary based on where they're produced, since
different countries have different regulations for the
cheese-making process. Following one set of rules
versus another when it comes to virtually any decision
at the farming, processing, and maturing levels can
dramatically impact the finished product. While these
variations exist in cheese, the recipes are more alike
than they are different. And these small differences
are what give cheeses their distinct characteristics.
In this way, cheese is comparable to bread or wine,
particularly since all involve microorganisms.
In pizza terms, we think there's another means
of categorization: when the cheese is added to
the pizza. Some cheeses are best added before the
pizza goes in the oven and others work better when
they're added after the bake, depending on whether
or not (or how) the cheese melts. Misjudging the
timing can affect how your pizza turns out. For
example, you'd never put cold mozzarella onto
a fully baked pizza (unless you are making Ohio
Valley-style pizza; see page 1:105); it needs to be
put on the pizza just before it's baked so it melts
completely. Parmesan, on the other hand, can be
grated onto a hot-from-the-oven pizza with lovely
results, but it can also be added before baking and
still turn out great. And cheeses like Taleggio or
blue cheese should generally be applied after baking so that they don't melt and disappear into the
pizza (we've developed a technique to prevent this,
however, and created a blue cheese that'll melt like
mozzarella; see page 332). We've included a table
on page 304 that will help you get the amounts
just right.
Alas, we don't cover every cheese in this chapter
(there are far too many varieties, which entire
books are devoted to). Here, we focus on the
cheeses commonly used on pizzas, plus a few of
our other favorites.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
Whether using sliced or shredded cheese matters (see page 296)
The behavior of cheese as it melts and browns (see page 309)
Should you freeze cheese on your pizza? (see page 312)
Ready-to-bake mozzarella (see page 321)
Fresh vs aged mozzarella (see page 323)
Make blue cheese, goat cheese, or Parmesan behave like pizza cheese (see page 332)
Increase the fat in your fior di latte mozzarella (see page 334)
Customize your pizza with flavored fior di latte mozzarella (see page 336)
Over 5.1 billion pounds of Italian-style
cheeses were produced in the United
States in 2018, making it the top category in natural cheese production.
According to the USDA, mozzarella,
or what we call pizza cheese, was by
far the largest share, at just under
4 billion pounds.
For pizza purposes, it makes the most
sense to think about cheeses in terms of
moisture content. The moisture content
will dictate how it behaves in a hot
oven, how long it can be in the heat,
and whether it's best to apply it before
or after baking.
For those who want to make cheese
at home, the amount of milk needed
to make a relatively small amount of
cheese can be a hurdle (see page 287).
Cheese makers typically raise their
own cows for milk or have a special
deal with a dairy farmer to make their
production possible. This means it's
tough to beata professional operation
cost-wise, but making cheese at home
is fun and there are advantages.
285
9
Cows were first brought to the North
American continent in 1525, at Veracruz, Mexico. The first cows arrived in
what would become the United States
in 1611 at the Jamestown Colony.
Farmhouse (or farmstead) cheeses are
vertically integrated operations where
the milk and cheese are made on site
(usually by hand). They typically use traditional methods to make their cheeses
and some cross the borders between
standard cheese categorization.
Carotenoid pigments are part of the
reason that butter from cow's milk is
yellow and that goat's milk is so white.
Goats and cows both obtain the pigments from their diet, but goats break
down the carotenoids differently, so the
pigments do not appear in their milk.
When we talk about milk from any
other animal besides cows, we'll
specify, say, sheep's milk or goat's milk.
For example, we expressly say buffalo's milk mozzarella (or mozzarella di
bufala) when we're talking about the
milk to make that specific cheese.
MILK
In general conversation, when we say "milk," we're
talking about cow's milk. Cow's milk can come from
Holstein Friesian, Jersey, Brown Swiss, Guernsey,
Ayrshire, Milking Shorthorn, or a number of other
breeds. The milk that you buy at the grocery store
is almost all from Holsteins, due to their high
production. This is a little bit like if the only wine
was Chardonnay. The generic milk market is itself
homogeneous! Different breeds of cattle produce
different milks (and different animals produce milk).
Holstein milk is not well suited to cheese making,
however. The majority of commercially produced
cheeses are made from cow's milk.
In larger cheese-making operations, milk from
different herds of cows, buffalo, goats, or sheep is
blended to standardize the butterfat and casein
content before starting cheese production. For
smaller farmhouse cheese makers, which often
make their cheeses from a single herd, the breed is
more important because certain types of cows, like
Ayrshire or Milking Shorthorn, produce milk that is
better suited to making cheese (the ratio of butterfat
to protein and the amount of lactic acid bacteria
need to be within a certain range). Certain famous
cheeses are even regulated by rules about the types
of cow's milk that can be used to make the cheese,
such as Comté, which must be made from the milk
of Simmental or Montbéliarde cows. The breed is
only one part of the equation, however. The farming
practices used to raise the animals have a critical
impact on the texture and melting profile of the
resulting cheese because the fatty acid composition
of cheese made from the milk of grass- or grain-fed
animals can be radically different.
In some ways, the type of milk used isn't the key
determinant of the final cheese result. You can buy
mozzarella made from buffalo's milk or cow's milk
(called fior di latte mozzarella), but we also successfully made a goat's milk mozzarella (see page 329).
The flavors of these cheeses will be different, but
they're still mozzarella. We've found that the type
of milk used is far less important than the skill of the
cheese maker and the process used.
Buffalo's milk contains roughly twice the milk fat
of cow's milk, which makes it especially prized for
cheese making (see page 290). Unlike cow's milk,
buffalo's milk contains no beta-carotene since the
buffalo have the ability to metabolize it into vitamin
A. The higher fat content and larger fat globules of
buffalo's milk also play a role in its color: they scatter
light better, making it more opaque. When baked,
the drained mozzarella di bufala showed almost no
sign of browning.
THE COMPOSITION OF COW'S MILK
Milk is interesting stuff. It serves as a nutritionally
complete meal to newborn mammals who often
don't have the ability to eat solid foods for the first
few months of their life. And due to its composition,
you can transform liquid milk into solid matter.
Depending on how you do it and what you use to do
it, you can obtain hundreds of different results,all
called cheese. (On average, it takes 1 kg of milk to
make 100 g of cheese.)
Milk is approximately 87% water and 13% solids.
These solids, on average, are made up of 25% fat.
Whole milk contains no less than 3.25% milk fat. The
milk fat is made up of individual fatty molecules (in
Jersey cows are known for producing high butterfat and protein in their milk, which makes
it great for drinking and for making soft and
semisoft cheeses (you'll also get more curds
per gallon of milk).
286 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
the form of milk fat globules), the most common of
which is called triglyceride (which, you guessed it,
has three fatty acids). Milk also contains mono- and
diglycerides, which are used as emulsifiers in certain
foods, such as ice cream. Ofall the edible fats, milk
fat has the most complex composition, with over 400
individual fatty acids. Most of the pleasant flavors we
identify in milk and dairy products come from these
fatty acids.
Cow's milk is about 3.9% protein, though this
amount can vary depending on the cow and what it
eats. Feed can have an impact. Farmers have an old
adage: breed for protein, feed for fat. (By "breed"
they mean select the breed.) About 20% of the milk
protein is whey (serum) and 80% is casein. (There
are also tiny fractions of some minor proteins.)
Casein is a key part of dairy cheese making. In
acid-coagulated cheeses (though this method
isn't used to make the majority of cheeses; see
page 292), the casein protein coagulates at a pH
of 4.6, and that coagulation forms the curd cheese
makers use to make their product. The serum or
whey proteins leave the curd with the whey in the
cheese-making process.
There are carbohydrates in milk, too, and it's
easiest to think ofthem as sugars. We've all heard the
term "lactose"-that's the sugar in milk. Any browning that occurs in cheese is a Maillard reaction that
involves these sugars. (The ending "-ose" indicates
sugar.) Lactose is a disaccharide, which means each
molecule is made up of two other sugar molecules
stuck together (in this case galactose and glucose),
and it's found dissolved in the whey part of milk.
Some people are lactose intolerant and are unable to
digest lactose. When you buy fat-free milk powder,
you are mostly buying lactose and protein.
Milk contains a number of vitamins and minerals,
including A, B, C, E, and K as well as folate and calcium. It's often fortified with vitamin D (originally
added to help prevent rickets).
While some people worry about the fat
content in milk due to caloric intake,
what they should be thinking about
more is the sugar (lactose) content in
milk, which is close to 5%.
It takes 485 L/128 gallons of milk to make a
30 kg/66 Ib wheel of Parmigiano-Reggiano
(this is the minimum weight required for a
single wheel).
Mozzarella di bufala
238 g/8.4 oz
Fior di latte mozzarella
133 g/4.69 oz
Pizza cheese
90 g/3.17 oz
Ever wondered why cheese is so much more expensive than milk? The images
above show the amount of cheese you get from 1 L (34 oz) of milk (buffalo's
milk for the mozzarella di bufala and cow's milk for the rest) to scale. Another
factor that you have to consider is that some cheeses are aged for a significant amount of time (a minimum of 1 year in the case of Parmigiano-Reggiano,
although most ofthat cheese is sold at 2-3 years old). In addition to not
being able to turn a profit during the aging period, the cheese makers must
give care and attention to make sure that the cheeses are aging correctly. It's
fascinating to think that on a single pizza you can have cheese that's a day old
or less and cheese that's years old, both made from the same ingredient.
CHEESE
Parmigiano-Reggiano
60 g/2.12 oz
1L/34 oz
9
RAW VERSUS PASTEURIZED MILK
When you buy cheese, you may notice the ingredient list indicating whether it was made with either
pasteurized milk or raw milk, meaning it wasn't
pasteurized. What's the difference? Advocates for
raw milk say that pasteurizing the milk destroys
some of its nutritional value and that raw milk
simply tastes better. In addition, raw milk has a more
diverse community of microbes, which contributes
to a more complex flavor in the cheese. So why
pasteurize? Because this heat-treatment step kills off
any harmful bacteria in the milk (people with compromised immune systems and pregnant women are
advised against drinking raw milk and eating cheese
made from it). Before choosing your cheeses, it's
worth learning a little more about the potential for
contamination, as well as the differences between
raw milk in fluid form and raw milk cheeses.
First, how does raw milk get contaminated in
the first place? Human pathogens can live in the
guts of the animals and in their manure. It's not
too difficult for tiny amounts of manure to wind
up in the milk. Sometimes, the pathogens can also
be spread by secretions from the udder.
Contamination can happen during processing,
too. The milk is first extracted from the animal,
then quickly cooled and stored. Dairies and
cheese-making facilities must keep everything
BREAKTHROUGHS IN
MILK TECHNOLOGY
THROUGHOUT HISTORY
Today, milk is positioned as a wholesome food,
something that builds strong bones and nourishes
children. But it wasn't always that way. In the mid19th and early 20th centuries, contaminated milk
sickened and even killed thousands of people.
Over the years, inventions have helped reduce the
chances of contaminants getting into milk. There
have also been advances that made it easier to get
milk to consumers. Here are some key moments in
milk history.
1856
French scientist Louis Pasteur began
experiments with killing bacteria in milk
by boiling it. The process would come to
be called pasteurization.
1878
A Swedish engineer named Gustaf de Laval
invented a way to mechanically separate cream
by centrifuge, replacing hand-skimming.
1899
Milk is mostly liquid, but it also contains fat, which would rise
to the top of the container if the milk sat fora while. French
inventor Auguste Gaulin came up with a way to prevent that
separation. He patented a milk homogenizer that crushed the
milk fat globules into droplets that were too small to float to
the surface. No more separation.
1917
Milk pasteurization became mandatory in the United States. Before
that, there were very few safeguards to prevent contamination.
Pasteurization, in combination with refrigeration, was instrumental in
the industrialization of milk.
scrupulously clean-the equipment, the floors,
the walls, the walk-ins. They do extensive testing
for pathogens and keep records in case of an outbreak. But sometimes, equipment isn't properly
sanitized. Without the pasteurization step, the
bacteria can thrive and spread. In some cases,
the bacteria can make people very sick. Serious
illnesses or even death have been connected with
contaminants such as E. coli, listeria, salmonella,
tuberculosis, and brucella in unpasteurized milk.
At this point, you may be wondering whether
it's worth the risk. First, understand that in most
of these cases, people get sick not from cheeses
made with raw milk but from drinking the milk in
fluid form. Many cheeses are aged products, and
most harmful bacteria do not survive during a
long aging process. But different cheeses behave
differently. The question then becomes how long
any given cheese needs to age to minimize any
risk. There are a number of different views on
these questions, and the result is that the rules
around raw milk cheeses vary by region.
In the United States, raw milk cheese may be
sold as long as it's aged for 60 days. A 2016 FDA
report sampled raw milk cheeses for a number of
pathogens, including E. coli, salmonella, and listeria, and found that the overall contamination rates
were less than 1%. For some, that's an acceptable
risk. Other cheese makers skirt the whole problem
and choose pasteurization. Buffalo's milk contains about twice as much
fat as cow's milk does.
ARSOLUTТЕ
PURE
1884
An American druggist named Hervey D.
Thatcher created the first milk bottle.
allowing sanitary delivery of milk.
1890
University of Wisconsin-Madison chemist
Stephen Babcock came up with way to
measure the fat content of milk. The
Babcock test was once the primary means
of determining milk quality.
1895
Commercial pasteurization of milk began.
1930s
Dairy facilities began switching to the high-temperature/
short-time (HTST) pasteurization method, which brings the
milk up to 72° C/162° F for 15 seconds, with a very quick
cool-down to 4.4°C/40°F.
1948
A faster method of pasteurization using
ultra-high temperatures (UHT) was developed. The milk is brought up to 135°C/
275°F for2-5 seconds and is then quickly
cooled down to 4.4°C/40°F or below.
It took more than three decades for this
process to catch on. UHT is only used for
shelf-stable products in the US, but it's more
common in milk products in Europe.
1981
UHT pasteurization began to be more widely implemented in the
1980s. Some people believe this heat step affects the flavor and
nutritional value of the milk, and thus favor using raw milk. This,
of course, does not come without its risks.
9
Both commercial cheese curds (top) and
freshly made cheese curds (bottom) are
typically stretched before using on pizza.
When we baked mozzarella on a pizza without
stretching the curd first, it was spongy,
more browned, and lacked the cheese pull of
stretched mozzarella (see page 319 for more
on why this happens).
CHEESE MAKING
How does milk, a liquid, transform into cheese, a
solid? And how does the flavor go from plain and
slightly sweet to nutty, pungent, earthy, tangy,and all those other different flavors you find in the wide
world of cheese? For most cheeses, there are a few
basic steps. First, the milk is heated, and an ingredient is added that acidifies the milk-it could be a
starter culture or something as simple as citric acid.
The acidification both helps flavor develop and sets
the stage for the next step, coagulation.
A coagulant, such as rennet, is typically added to
help turn the casein protein in the liquid form into a
solid gel. This gel or coagulum is then cut into small
cubes or curds. These curds vary in size depending
on the cheese. Some cheeses require curds to be
cooked or washed to produce specific textures.
Curds are then manipulated to form the desired
shape, either by stretching (for pasta filata cheeses
like mozzarella), cheddaring, or ladling into a form
(like a wheel of gouda). Whey, the liquid by-product,
is drained off as part of this process.
Many cheeses are pressed with weight to further
aid in draining and acidification. As cheeses age,
certain techniques can be utilized to encourage the
growth of beneficial molds, yeasts, and bacteria.
Cheese makers generally use the French term "affinage" to describe this practice.
There are endless possibilities for variation at
each step. The milk of various animals has distinct
flavors-goat's milk tastes different from cow's milk.
Different starters produce different results. Rennet
acts a little differently on milk than other coagulants.
Different molds make different cheeses; for example,
the growth of Penicillium roqueforti makes the veins
you see in blue cheese, while Penicillium candidum is
what helps to create the white rind on Brie (under
the right conditions). Forming the cheese into
different shapes can change the flavor and texture, as
can molding or pressing it.
There are many resources available that provide
details beyond the basic cheese-making steps
described here. In this book, we focus on the aspects
of cheese making that are pertinent to the two most
common types of cheese that you might make for
pizza: mozzarella and ricotta. Although you can
easily purchase these cheeses in different forms, both
are relatively simple to make. You can also create
spectacular results when you vary the amount of
fat (see page 334) or infuse the milk with different
flavors (see page 336).
The important figure for cheese-making
quality is the ratio of protein to fat. The
protein is a determinant of the yield of
cheese but not necessarily of the quality. Low-solids milk (the milk from the
height of summer grazing) makes good
cheese, just not very much of it for the
volume of milk that you get.
During our visit to Caseificio "Al Valico," we
learned the ins and outs of making mozzarella
from our gracious host Antonio Campanile
(pictured at left).
290 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THE BASIC CHEESE-MAKING PROCESS
The basic cheese-making process is very similar for all cheeses. Small
changes in technique give us the huge range of cheeses. Cheeses can be
made from raw or pasteurized milk (see page 288)that may be homogenized or standardized for protein and fat content. Some cheeses start
with a combination of milk and skim milk, while others use milk that is
enriched with heavy cream. Allcheeses start by coagulating the milk.
After that, the steps for making specific cheeses will differ depending
on the type. The diagram below shows the overarching steps of the
cheese making process from acidification through coagulation, draining,
salting, shaping, and ripening. We highlight the process for pasta filata
(see page 297) and cheddaring since they are two ofthe key processes in
cheese-making that are the most pertinent to pizza.
INOCULATION
The term "pasta filata" doesn't have anything to do with what you see
as a course on a menu; it means "spun paste" in Italian. This category of
cheeses includes some of those most commonly used for pizza, namely
fresh mozzarella (fior di latte) and low-moisture mozzarella. The former
is ubiquitous on margherita pizzas, while the latter is shredded and used
on a variety of pizza styles. In fact, low-moisture mozzarella is so widely
used that it is referred to as "pizza cheese," which is the term that we typically use in this book. Note that the popular string cheese snack is made
by hot extruding low-moisture mozzarella and cutting it into lengths
before packaging and selling it.
Primary lactic cultures
• Secondary cultures: Lactic
culture adjuncts, molds, smear
cocktails. etc.
The fat percentage of the
resulting cheese is not the
same as the fat percentage
of the milk mixture. The
solid matter from the milk
(the fats and proteins) is
what stays in the cheesethis is also what contributes
to the amazing flavor of the
cheese. The whey gets left
behind.
COAGULATION:
GELATION OR PRECIPITATION
CUTTING OR BREAKING
Rennet (animal or protein)
Microbial enzymes
Recombinant chymosin
Acidification of warm milk,
direct or fermentation
Direct acidification of hot milk
COOKING AND OTHER CURD
IN WHEY TREATMENTS
Mesophilic: cook up to 39°C/102° F
Thermophilic: cook up to 55° C/131°F
Washing with cold or warm water
DRAINING AND POST-DRAINING
CURD TREATMENTS
Dipping curd and whey into forms
CHEDDAR PASTA FILATA
Curd ripening
Cheddaring (cutting,
stacking, and milling)
Vat salting
Forming and pressing
Aging
Curd ripening
Milling (for industrial
production(
Forming into a hoop
Hot water stretching and
shaping
Brining
RICOTTА
Collecting and forming floating curd
9
292
Protein content is by far the most
important component of milk to
consider when you're making cheese.
If you don't have sufficient casein, you
likely won't be able to make cheese.
The outside of cheese is called the rind;
the inside is called the paste.
For mesophilic cultures, there is practically no acid production at temperatures under 20°C/68°F. Growth is
also severely inhibited above 39° C/
102° F. For thermophilic cultures, their
optimal acid production occurs
between 38°C/100°F and 43°C/
110°F, depending on the culture. They
can survive at temperatures higher than
55°C/131°F, but don't perform well at
those temperatures.
HOW TO Use a pH Meter
CULTURES
Milk left to sit out will be invaded by microorganisms. One class of these are lactic acid bacteria
(LAB). They secrete acid that causes milk to
thicken. The direct result of that is yogurt. Cultures,
like LAB, are prepared inoculations of molds, bacteria, or yeast that are added to milk and cheese. They
have two main purposes: to promote ripening and
develop acidity. Many strands of LAB can acidify
cheese as well as work to speed up ripening (other
adjunct cultures like propionic acid bacteria are
added for flavor). LAB for cheese making tolerate
only low oxygen concentrations and are stored dormant in the freezer. There are thousands of strains of
LAB specifically selected for their purpose.
Acid also forms the coagulation for a number of
cheeses, including cream cheese, feta, cottage cheese,
and some recipes for mozzarella. Acid causes the
milk to thicken and ultimately the proteins to bind
together, a process called coagulation, or curdling.
(the lower the pH, the faster the coagulation). Those
curds then begin to contract, pushing moisture out
of the cheese and slowing the growth of bacteria
and other pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus,
Listeria monocytogenes, salmonella, and E. coli. It affects
texture and flavor, too. The pH of milk is around
Make sure to buy a pH meterthat's waterproof, preferably with the glass
electrode housed ina probe that can be easily dipped into cheese. Seе
1
6.7. Examples of cheeses with a higher pH (close to
that of milk) include blue cheese, Brie, and queso
fresco. Cheeses with a lower pH (around 4.9-4.6)
and higher acidity are softer; they have less calcium
available because the acid dissolves it, which makes
for a weaker protein matrix. Examples include cream
cheese, feta, and cottage cheese.
LAB cultures can be grouped according to four criteria: what they produce (metabolites), their optimal
growth temperature, the forms of inoculation, and the
starter composition. In terms of metabolites, cultures
can be classified as either homofermentative or heterofermentative. Homofermentative cultures mostly
produce lactic acid. Heterofermentative cultures
produce lactic acid, but they also produce carbon
dioxide (which produces holes in some cheeses),
acetaldehyde (a component of yogurt flavor), diacetyl
(which determines the flavor of certain cheeses, like
Havarti and gouda), and ethyl alcohol.
Cheese makers use specific strains of LAB to
achieve specific results. These are a combination of
coagulation ofthe cheese but also some of the flavor.
These cultures also have characteristic temperatures
that they like to be at. Thermophilic cultures like
higher temperatures and mesophilic cultures like
lower temperatures.
our Resources section on pages 3:377–3:380 forinformation on where to
buy a pH meter.
2 Before each use, rinse the glass-encased
electrode with distilled water. Pat it dry
with a lint-free tissue or towel. Don't overhandle it; just let the tissue absorb any
excess moisture.
Calibrate your meter according to the
manufacturer's instructions. We suggest
recalibrating the meter once a week or so
if you use it on a regular basis; if you rely
on it only occasionally, calibrate it just
before you use it. Always keep the tip of
the pH meter (where the electrode is)
submerged in a storage solution such as
potassium chloride (KCI) when not in use;
this helps keep it clean and also protects
the electrode from damage. It is extremely
sensitive and the reason why some pH
meters aren't exactly cheap.
3
4
Insert the probe into the cheese. Wait a
few seconds until the number it shows
does not fluctuate. Note the reading.
Rinse the glass-encased electrode with
more distilled water, and pat it dry with a
lint-free tissue or towel. Return it to the
storage solution until next use.
You can also test for pH using paper pH testing strips. They are less expensive but also less accurate.
Why do some cheeses melt while others don't? It has to do with pH. Cheeses that are either very high or
very low in acid won't melt.
C
.27
77.0 F
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
RENNET AND OTHER COAGULANTS
Somehow ancient cheese makers discovered that
sheep intestines had ana enzyme that made the milk
coagulate more firmly than it would with acid and
do so instantly. Subsequent science has shown this
is due to an enzyme called rennet. Rennet is not
found only in animal intestines. It's also produced
from vegetable sources, notably from an extract of
cardoon (Cynara cardunculus). In addition, there are
other kinds of coagulants that are used. These days
most rennet is produced from vegetables. There
are also microbial coagulants, which are typically
extracted from a fungus called Rhizomucor miehei (or
sometimes R. pusillus or Cryphonectria parasitica).
Coagulants made from the fungus Aspergillus niger or
the yeast Kluyveromyces lactis can also be used.
Ruminants are animals, such as cows,
that have more than one stomach.
The plant matter they eat is first fermented in a special stomach before it's
digested.
AUTHENTICATING MOZZARELLA DI BUFALA
One of the traditional cheeses for making pizza in Campania is mozzarella di bufala, which is a cheese made from the milk of the Asian water
buffalo. Buffalo's milk has roughly double the amount of fat as cow's milk,
but shares a similar flavor. This results in a softer, richer mozzarella. The
creamier milk from water buffalo has long been cherished and commanded a higher price than cow's milk. The Italian government had to
officially define and recognize mozzarella made from water buffalo's milk
in 1979 to protect the consumer from a common fraudulent practice of
selling cow's milk mozzarella at the higher price of mozzarella di bufala.
The latter became a DOP cheese (see page 213) in 1993, protected and
regulated by the Consortium for the Protection of the Mozzarella di
Bufala Campana. The cheese's origin and the traditional technology used
to make it are guaranteed by a legal standard of identity. Only cheese
made in specific areas in Italy with 100% water buffalo's milk can be distributed with the consortium's logo.
Fraud in the form of substitutinga cheaper type of milk for one of a
higher quality is not limited to buffalo's milk; it's common for other milk,
such as sheep's and goat's, as well. What are the ways to trace back the
origin of the milk in cheeses so that you don't get cheated? Given the
importance of this task, several methods have been developed. Tests are
constantly evolving to do this, including ones to test baked pizzas.
With no intention to deceive, we developed our enhanced fat mozzarella (see page 334) to see if we could make a cow's milk-based cheese
that was as rich a mozzarella di bufala. The results are delicious.
COW
BUFFALO
CHEESE 293
CHEESE CLASSIFICATION BY TEXTURE AND MOISTURE CONTENT
Cheese is often classified into categories. But the classification itself is a
bit subjective. To put it plainly, one cheese maker's semihard is another's
semisoft. For example, one book we consulted says that cheddar is a
hard cheese. Another book says that Colby and Monterey Jack are forms
of cheddar but calls them all semihard cheeses.
We focused on the most common cheese texture categories and the
moisture content for the different varieties of cheese when available. The
moisture and fat percentages tell you only so much about the nature of
the cheese because the cheese-making process has such a big impact
on the final product. For example, if you compare a ripe Camembert,
which is 48% moisture, and a Comté, with 43% moisture, their moisture
percentages aren't that far apart but their textures are completely different. The Comté is hard, but the Camembert will ooze because there is an
enzyme causing it to be soft. The examples listed in the following table
are by no means exhaustive; they are merely some of the most commonly found cheeses in each category that we would use on pizza.
Classification Examples Moisture
content %
Fat
content %
Type of milk
Very hard/extra-hard
cheeses (internal
bacterial-ripened
varieties)
Parmigiano-Reggiano 30.8 27
Pecorino Romano 31 29 sheep
raw cow's milk in
Italy; pasteurized
cow's milk in the
US
Notes
Parmigiano-Reggiano and others in the very hard
category often have a DOP seal, meaning they're made
under strict rules (see page 213). American cheeses of
this style don't follow those rules and thus can't use
the Parmigiano-Reggiano name, so they're just called
Parmesan.
Grana Padano 32 28.4 Cow
American Parmesan has a very different look and taste
from DOP Parmigiano-Reggiano, and sometimes the
quality isn't as high.
Asiago (d'Allevo) 34 31 part-skim raw
cow's milk
Pecorino Romano is slightly cheaper than DOP
Parmigiano-Reggiano and can be used as a substitute.
A grainy texture is desirable in some of the very hard
cheeses; that's what the "Grana" in Grana Padano means.
Hard cheeses (internal Comté 43.5 30 COW
bacterial-ripened Idiazabal 33.2 37.8 sheep varieties)
Mahon 31.7 32.6 cow
All hard cheeses have more or less the same method
for manufacture. They're all pressed during ripening to
produce a hard, uniform, and closed-texture cheese with
no holes.
Cheddar 36 33.8 COW
Colby 38.2 32.11 cow
Gouda 41 28.5 cow, goat, or sheep
Cheddar is possibly the most important cheese in the
hard cheeses group. There's even a step in making these
cheeses called cheddaring, in which the curds are acidified and textured before they're milled and dry salted.
Monterey Jack 41.01 30.2 COW
Wisconsin brick cheese 40 30 CoW
American muenster 41.77 30.04 cow
Pasta filata cheeses
(stretched curd)
Fior di latte mozzarella 54 18 cow
Mozzarella di bufala 58 21 water buffalo
Burrata 60-70 15-20 Cow
This group of cheeses is made by stretching curds before
shaping the cheese (its name means "spun paste" in
Italian). Fior di latte mozzarella can also be purchased
smoked (the process and materials may vary).
Low-moisture mozzarella 47 23.7 COW
Provolone 42.5 27 cow
Low-moisture mozzarella is also called American
mozzarella, pizza cheese, or part-skim mozzarella.
Caciocavallo 35-40 25-30 Cow
Scamorza 45-52 20-30 cow or water
buffalo
Provolone piccante is a variation made with a culture
that gives it a stronger flavor. Regular provolone (provolone dolce) is made with rennet extract. Both can be
purchase smoked.
Left to right: mozzarella di bufala, burrata, and fior di latte mozzarella balls
294 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Classification Examples Moisture
content %
Fat Type of milk Notes
content %
Semihard cheeses
Cheeses with holes Edam 43 24 cow or goat The holes in these cheeses are called eyes.
Gouda 41 28.5 cow, goat, or
sheep
Havarti 43.5 26.5 cow
Emmental 35.5 30.5 cow
Gruyère 43.5 30 cow
Manchego 35.5 33.6 sheep
Aged fontina 37.92 31.14 Cow
High-salt cheeses Feta 59.7 20.3
Halloumi 43 24.7
sheep
sheep
Semisoft mold-ripened cheeses
Washed-rind and surface
mold-ripened cheeses
Camembert 52.5 23 cow
Brie 48.6 26.9 cow
Époisses 55 22-25 cow
Fontina 37.92 31.14 CoW
Taleggio 45-50 48 COW
French münster 43 29 cow
Blue cheeses (internal
mold-ripened varieties)
Roquefort 40 31 cow
Stilton 38.3 33 cow
Cabrales 43-45 30 cow
Gorgonzola 48.4 31.2 cow
Soft cheeses
Acid-coagulated cheeses Cream cheese 50 33.5 cow
Quark 79 0.2 cow
Goat cheese 60.75 21.08 goat
(chèvre)
Heat/acid-coagulated
cheeses
Ricotta 72 12.7 cow
Mascarpone 47.8 42 cow
Processed cheeses American
cheese
43.12 24.46 cow
Provel n/a n/a Cow
Catupiry n/a n/a COW
CHEESE
Other cheeses in this category are raclette (see our Raclette
Slice on page 255), Beaufort, Appenzeller, and Jarlsberg,
though they're less commonly used on pizza.
Emmental is the cheese typically referred to as Swiss.
In addition to semihard gouda, there's also aged gouda,
which would fall in the very hard category, and smoked
gouda.
High-salt cheeses don't typically melt and if they do, they
don't spread. Feta is brittle and will burn before it melts.
Halloumi will hold its shape even underthe broiler; you can
grill it and it won't spread (in fact, it is prized for its ability to
brown).
These are typically very aromatic, piquant cheeses (the
soft versions are usually more pungent than the semihard
examples).
Surface mold-ripened cheeses have a soft, edible rind. Some
prefer to remove it before eating but that's not necessary.
Fontina's texture changes through the aging process. It's
semisoft at first, but as it ages it can firm up and fits more
properly in the semihard category.
These cheeses spread a lot when they melt, so we add them
just before the end or after baking so that they don't turn into
a puddle.
These can be very aromatic (some blue cheeses are
described as having a barnyard aroma). They don't stretch
(unless you use our technique on page 332) and tend to melt
into a puddle during baking, which is why we recommend
adding them during or after baking. You can add them
before baking if you nestle them in with the mozzarella, but
you can't really see them on the pizza after it comes out of
the oven.
These soft cheeses are usually added toward the end or after
baking (or are included as part ofthe base sauce). Ricotta is
used in combination with mozzarella on classic white pizzas.
Don't confuse ricotta salata with ricotta; it's firm and drier,
and it's made from sheep's milk.
Processed cheese is not exactly cheese. Because of the way
it's made, the word "processed" must be added to the label.
It has a very low melting point and doesn't have the stretchy
texture of a cheese like mozzarella. For some, this is a desirable characteristic. When you choose a slice from a whole
pizza, the cheese tends to stay on the crust.
БАЗА ПРЕМИ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
295
9
PREPARING YOUR CHEESE
You can functionally divide the types of cheeses that
you use on pizza into two categories: the main melting cheese as a primary ingredient, and an accent
cheese for flavor. The majority of the time (but
not always), the main melting cheese has a milder
flavor profile, like mozzarella, provolone, Monterey
Jack cheese, or cheddar. Accent cheeses, such as
Parmigiano-Reggiano or blue cheese, are usually
more strongly flavored, used sparingly, and applied
after baking.
For the majority of the main melting cheeses
that you'll put on pizza, we can narrow down the
key question to this: slice it or shred it? The key
factors that go into the decision are the cheese itself,
whether it's going on before or after baking, and
its relationship to the sauce (whether it's going on
underneath or on top of it). Of course, there are
pros and cons for each. Slices give you a bit more
control. It's easy to achieve consistency in terms of
weight and also in terms of even distribution across
the pizza. Place the slices so they slightly overlap
each other, and your pizza will come out neat and
orderly. (If you're going for an artisanal or rustic
look, though, it might look a little too uniform.)
Because slices are placed in a single layer, you might
wind up with less cheese on your pizza than if you
use shredded cheese. If you or your customers want
more cheese, you can slice it a little thicker.
Shredded cheese, on the other hand, tends to be
a bit harder to control by weight unless you portion
it out ahead of time (see page 305). It takes a little
practice, but soon you may find it faster and easier
to use than sliced cheese. Pizza cheese, scamorza,
caciocavallo, Monterey Jack, and provolone are all
commonly use shredded (or sliced) on pizza. Many
of the cheeses used on pizza are available preshredded, and they're designed to work best on pizza that
takes 4-6 minutes to bake. If you're shredding your
own cheese, use the largest grater size you can get
(except if using very hard cheeses, as noted on page
297). Here are our recommendations for preparing
different categories of cheese.
IDEAL CHEESES FOR PIZZAS
There is no single ideal cheese for pizza because there are lots of different styles of pizza, each with different qualities and baking criteria. Generally speaking, you want a cheese that melts well. That said,
Parmesan and other hard cheeses can be delicious as a flavor accent but
don't work well as the main melting cheese for a pizza.
Fresh mozzarella is the most iconic cheese and the only one you
should use when making AVPN Neapolitan pizza, yet it's not perfect
when you get it. You have to add a step to drain it before using, otherwise
you will end up with a puddle of water in the middle of your pizza-а
serious flaw in our minds (see page 1:113). Pizza cheese, or low-moisture
mozzarella, is perfect for melting but is best suited to baking at lower
temperatures.
Part-skim mozzarella, low-moisture
mozzarella, American mozzarella, and
pizza cheese are different names for
basically the same thing. It's the kind
of cheese you see on most New York
pizza, and many other styles, too. We
call it pizza cheese in this book.
VERY HARD CHEESES
Finely grate these cheeses with a cheese grater or
Microplane. If you grate them ahead oftime, keeр
them in an airtight container in refrigeration. Alternatively, you can grate very hard cheese directly onto the
pizza (either before or after baking). It doesn't take
too long and it avoids the problem of clumping, which
sometimes happens if you store grated cheeses.
You can buy very hard cheeses pregrated, though
their texture is actually more milled than grated.
That's why the particles of store-bought grated
Parmesan have a very different shape and size than if
you grated Parmigiano-Reggiano; they are different
cheeses and Parmesan will grind into more of a
powder. Keep refrigerated in an airtight container.
Use a vegetable peeler or even a mandoline to
create wider (but still very thin) slices or curls that
are usually applied after baking. They're fragile, so
it's best to do this to order rather than ahead of time.
This technique is often used to make ParmigianoReggiano curls that are applied to arugula salad.
HARD AND SEMIHARD CHEESES
Use a cheese/meat slicer to thinly slice these cheeses
between 2.5 mm and 4 mm / 0.1 in and 0.16 in
thick. Place the slices in a single layer or, if you want
to stack them, use parchment paper in between the
slices to prevent them from sticking together. Keeр
the slices refrigerated. Room-temperature slices can
soften and become difficult to handle since they
stick together.
If you want to grate these cheeses, use the
largest grater size. Grated cheeses should be kept in
refrigeration or cold at all times. If not, the cheese
will clump. Hand-cut or cubed cheese also must be
kept cold.
PASTA FILATA CHEESES
Pasta filata, Italian for "spun paste," is a technique for
making cheese that includes a stretching step, giving
the cheese a fibrous texture. Cheeses in this category
that are often used on pizza include whole-milk
fresh mozzarella, mozzarella di bufala, burrata, pizza
cheese (also known as low-moisture mozzarella or
American mozzarella), provolone, caciocavallo,
and scamorza.
Fresh Pasta Filata Cheeses
Fior di latte mozzarella and mozzarella di bufala are
typically sold in balls of various sizes. These cheeses
have a high moisture content and are suspended in
brine, so if you don't want a soupy pizza with a puddle in the middle, you'll need to drain off the brine
before using (see page 298). Some pizzaioli like to
tear the cheese ball apart to order. This helps with
It's a common practice to tear pieces of mozzarella by hand when assembling a margherita
pizza. We prefer to cut our balls of mozzarella
with a french fry cutter and drain them overnight to remove excess water and reduce the
chances of a soupy pizza.
Some types of pasta filata cheeses
are ripened, like provolone (ripened
for 2-6 months at 12-14°C/54-57° F)
and caciocavallo (typically ripened for
3-4 months but sometimes up to 12
months, at 10°C/50° F).
% of cheeses used on pizza
80
70
09
50
40
30
20
10
Common Types of Cheese Used on Pizza
Low-moisture mozzarella: 74.71%
Parmesan: 24.51%
Mozzarella di bufala: 14.32%
Pecorino Romano: 10.20%
Blue cheese: 6.37%
Ricotta: 6.18%
Fontina: 4.74%
Provolone: 3.86%
Types of Cheese
CHEESE
Cheddar: 2.32%
Caciocavallo: 1.16%
Swiss: 1.16%
Goat cheese: 0.97%
Taleggio: 0.58%
Crescenza: 0.39%
Monterey Jack: 0.39%
Bel Paese: 0.19%
Gran Bù: 0.19%
American Muenster: 0.19%
In the chart below, we gathered information
from 518 pizza recipes that use cheese. The
percentages represent the number of times
a cheese was used, and since more than one
cheese is often used on a pizza, the total
percentages add up to over 100%. For example, Parmesan isn't used alone, but it is still
represented widely in 24.5% of recipes.
297
9
We wondered if we could achieve a
more uniform melt if we made the size
of the cheese particles smaller. To get
the small particles, we had to get the
mozzarella cold, almost freezing. Then
we grated it to 2-3 mm diameter. However, this did not dramatically change
the result.
In certain regions of Italywhere
buffalo's milk is not used, the term
"fior di latte" is reserved for cow's milk
mozzarella acidified with lactic fermentation. The term differentiates between
cow's milk mozzarella, which is made
by direct acidification, and fior di latte
mozzarella that is made by bacterial
fermentation.
Fresh cheeses such as ricotta, quark,
mascarpone, or crème fraîche don't
really require any preparation and are
typically spooned on after baking.
portion control, but there's a risk the pieces will be
too wet. Other pizzaioli use a special food processor
or french fry cutter to cut pieces about 1.25 cm/0.5
in thick. Fresh mozzarella can be difficult to slice by
hand but you can purchase it presliced.
The overall sizes of the slices will vary since the
cheese starts off as a ball (although you can find logs
of fresh mozzarella that are presliced into uniformly
sized pieces). You'll need to drain these pieces before
service to keep the cheese from leaking excess moisture onto the pizza. We line a colander or strainer
with cheesecloth and place it over a large bowl, then
leave it to drain for a few hours (or even overnight
in refrigeration) before we use it. If you forget to do
this step, and really only in cases of emergency (see
page 321), you can press the cheese hard between
two clean kitchen towels.
In addition to draining, you'll need to temper
these cheeses. Placing cold cheese on the pizza
dough will cool down the surface and slow down
the baking, and the cheese won't melt properly.
This is especially important for pizzas that bake for
a short time at high temperatures, like Neapolitan
pizzas. Some of the top Neapolitan pizzaioli, in fact,
insist on keeping the cheese at room temperature
throughout service while others rotate their tubs of
drained mozzarella in and out of refrigeration. If you
keep your fresh mozzarella at room temperature for
service, you can store it this way for only up to
2 hours.
If you're making a lot of pizza, you'll need a
schedule for tempering. The cheese should be taken
out of refrigeration 2 hours before you'll use it-but
if you keep it out for more than 2 hours (see page
3:329), you risk creating a food safety hazard. When
we're baking a lot of pizza, we stagger the tempering
step, removing cheese from refrigeration at 30-
minute intervals, so we always have a batch ready
at room temperature.
Burrata is half fior di latte mozzarella and half
cream; it functions as a cheese and sauce at the same
time. You don't want to drain it because you'd get
rid of the delicious creamy part in the middle, but
keep in mind that it's super wet. Don't use too much
of this on Neapolitan pizzas or you'll get a soupy
pizza. (One way to mitigate that is to use a thicker
substance in place of the cream in the center; see
page 331.) For other, longer-baking pizza styles,
burrata works pretty well. The moisture has enough
time to evaporate in the oven and become something of a sauce. As with other fior di latte cheeses,
keep burrata refrigerated and then temper it 2 hours
before baking.
Low-Moisture Mozzarella
Low-moisture mozzarella (either whole-milk or
part-skim) is the most commonly used cheese
on pizzas made outside of Italy (that's part of the
reason why the term "pizza cheese" is frequently
used to label this cheese). It's quite different from
Italian fresh mozzarella. It's much lower in moisture,
Neapolitan pizza margherita with pizza
cheese
Neapolitan pizza margherita with
caciocavallo cheese
During our travels, we observed many esteemed pizzaioli using low-moisture cheeses such as
scamorza or caciocavallo on Neapolitan pizzas, either in combination with or instead of the
standard fior di latte mozzarella or mozzarella di bufala. We decided to give those two low-moisture cheeses a try and compare them with the pizza cheese (low-moisture mozzarella) that we use
on our New York pizza, among others. While many Italian pizzaioli that we talked to look down
Neapolitan pizza margherita with
scamorza cheese
on pizza cheese with disdain, you can successfully bake scamorza, caciocavallo, and pizza cheese
on Neapolitan pizza dough at Neapolitan pizza baking temperatures. All of the cheeses melted
similarly and looked virtually the same, with minor differences in fat separation and browning. The
pizza cheese and scamorza were closer in flavor, while the caciocavallo had a slightly more distinct
saltiness and character due to the fact that caciocavallo is usually aged longer than scamorza.
298 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
so it doesn't need to be drained. You can buy it in
log form, sliced, or shredded. Most pizzerias buy it
shredded for convenience. Pizzaioli who want to
control the size of the shred buy logs and shred it
themselves. The logs are marginally cheaper, but
remember, it takes labor to shred.
We like to use shredded cheese on most pizzas
(primarily New York pizza but also Detroit-style
and deep-dish), and we buy it preshredded. For
New York or artisan pizza, you need less cheese
than on a thin-crust pizza because it heats up faster.
A round pizza is easier to cover with shredded
cheese than with square slices because you'd have
to overlap them.
We've found that sliced cheese works nicely on
New York square pizzas because it gives you a nice
even layer. Shredded cheese can be used but it takes
longer to cover those pzzas. Shredded cheese can also
fall in between the pan and dough and burn. We typically slice our pizza cheese about 3 mm / 0.12 in thick.
Some preshredded cheese comes tossed in
cellulose (up to 4% is legally allowed) to prevent
clumping (see page 302). This can make things
easier during a busy service when you may store
your cheese at room temperature for longer than 2
hours. Otherwise, we recommend keeping shredded
pizza cheese refrigerated at all times.
SURFACE MOLD-RIPENED AND
SURFACE SMEAR-RIPENED CHEESES
These cheeses are typically eaten as a cheese
course. For that purpose, they're best enjoyed at
room temperature, which will allow the interior
to soften. Using them for pizza is a different story.
Softer cheeses are hard to handle and tend to stick
to everything, so if we're using them for pizza, we
like to keep them in a wine fridge, which is a little
warmer than a regular refrigerator (13°C/5S°F).
This keeps them cool enough to handle without
sticking to our hands but warm enough so that they
won't cool down the pizza significantly when you
put them on top. If you don't have a wine fridge, you
can slice the cheese when it's cold and then keep it
refrigerated.
These cheeses should be added after the pizza is
baked (or a minute or two before the pizza comes
Low-moisture mozzarella and scamorza
are so closely aligned they share the
same specific standards in the FDA's
Code of Federal Regulations.
Armenian string cheese, known as
chechil, is a relative of the string cheese
that has often been stuck into children's
lunch boxes throughout history in the
United States. Chechil is braided and
studded with nigella seeds; one way to
serve it is to pull apart all of the strands
of the string cheese and place them on
a large platter.
THE ORIGIN OF BURRATA
In name alone, burrata sounds like an old-world
cheese, conjuring up images of the Italian countryside. Funny thing is, it's not so traditional at all. There
are two origin stories for burrata, one dating from the
1920s and the other from the 1950s-which would
mean it's about as old as the factory-made pizza
cheese that you find in every grocery store.
The story makes the most sense after you know
exactly what burrata is. A cow's milk cheese in the
pasta filata family, it looks much like fresh mozzarella,
and like that cheese, it's sold in balls. But if you cut into
a ball of burrata, you'll find that the middle is hollowed
out and filled, dumpling-like, with small strips of
cheese and a rich cream. It's a lovely cheese.
It's also a great way to get rid of leftovers from
the cheese-making process. According to the 1920s
origin story, day-old fresh mozzarella tended to dry
up, so an Apulian cheese maker decided to pull the
balls into shreds, soak them in cream, and tuck them
inside a new ball of fresh mozzarella-those became
the strips inside of burrata, called stracciatella, meaning "rags."
The other origin story dates to 1956, and the details
are mostly the same, though a little more specific. The
inventor was said to be one Lorenzo Bianchino, who
realized he could use scraps from the mozzarellamaking process to make a new and richer kind of
cheese.We offer our own version of burrata in the
recipe on page 331.
CHEESE 299
9
If you want to use a little cheese to act
as a glue for toppings, you can just use
some shredded pizza cheese.
Mexico's cuisine uses cheese abundantly and in many different forms.
Some cheeses are similar to gouda
cheese, others are paneer-like (queso
cotija and queso fresco) or melt like
pizza cheese (Chihuahua cheese).
There are even pasta filata cheeses,
such as Oaxaca string cheese. The latter
is similar to its Neapolitan relative, fior
di latte mozzarella, which is easy to tear
apart, very white, and easy to melt.
In India, paneer is often made with
buffalo's milk, which offers a far superior version of this cheese with a ton
of flavor, unlike many that you find in
other countries.
out of the oven). You can either cut them to order or
portion them ahead of time. If doing the latter, place
them in a single layer over parchment paper on a
sheet pan and cover with plastic wrap.
BLUE CHEESES
These cheeses are typically crumbled and then
sprinkled on top of the pizza after baking. They're
easiest to crumble when very cold. Use your hands
(not a knife) and break into pieces no bigger than
1.25 cm / 0.5 in. Smaller crumbles will soften with
the heat of the baked pizza and, hopefully, stay on
when you eat it; larger pieces tend to roll off. If you
like larger pieces, consider adding them when the
pizza is halfway or two-thirds baked so they'll have a
chance to melt a little. If you're doing a four- or fivecheese pizza, it is not out of the question to apply the
blue-veined cheeses with the others before baking.
They'll meld with the other cheeses and give a slight
blue-gray hue.
SOFT CHEESES
This category includes acid-coagulated cheeses
like cream cheese and quark, heat/acid-coagulated
cheeses like ricotta, goat cheese, and mascarpone,
and heat/culture-coagulated dairy products like
crème fraîche and sour cream. Keep them refrigerated in an airtight container and portion to order.
Alternatively, keep them in a piping bag (in refrigeration when not in use), which can make portioning
fast and easy.
If you're using these cheeses more as a sauce than
a finishing topping, apply them to the pizza dough
before baking (see page 303). With the high-fat
spreads, such as mascarpone or crème fraîche, some
of the fat will separate out in the oven. Apply in a
thin layer. You can also try interspersing them with
tomato sauce.
PROCESSED CHEESES
You can buy these cheeses in logs and slice them
yourself, but we don't recommend it; they're hard to
slice cleanly and tend to stick to the slicer. Instead,
buy them presliced; the slices come already separated by plastic or parchment paper so they're ready
to go. Provel, used on St. Louis-style pizza (see
below), is also available in extruded strands that look
like fresh spaghetti.
IMO'S
PIZZA
SHREDDED PROVEL® CHEESE
SHREDDED PASTEURIZED PROCESS CHEDDAR,
SWISS & SMOKED PROVOLONE CHEESE
The Antente a Lo Prrza Cheere and Salad Topping"
on Back | Great for Salad Topper | Mokes Two 12
NET WT 8 OZ (227g)
KEEP REFRIGERATED
THE ORIGIN OF PROVEL CHEESE
Provel is a processed cheese that comes with some strong opinions. It's a
blend of cheddar, Swiss, and smoked provolone, and is a standard component of St. Louis-style pizza (see page 3:22).
Aside from the flavor, a distinctive characteristic of Provel is its lack of
stretchability. On the plus side, that means you can bite cleanly through
it, so you're not going to accidentally pull off all the toppings in one big
cheese stretch (as sometimes happens with pizza cheese). On the minus
side, even its biggest proponents admit it's an acquired taste. Detractors
use words like "waxy" to describe it. One called it "melted plastic from
the '80s." But there are many die-hards who swear by the stuff.
John Sigillito,a downtown grocer who also acted as a distributor,
introduced the cheese to St. Louis in the late 1940s, and the name was
trademarked in 1950. We found a local newspaper ad from 1957 showing that it was a popular ingredient in both pizza and other Italian-style
dishes, but it truly became synonymous with St. Louis-style pizza (see
page 1:105) thanks to Imo's, a local pizzeria founded in 1964. (Although
Provel was nowhere to be found on the original St. Louis pizza: it didn't
exist then.) The locals loved the cracker-thin pizzas with Provel, and the
chain now has more than 100 locations in Missouri, Illinois, and Kansas.
While the style hasn't caught on much outside that region, St. Louisstyle pizza fans can order Provel, or even frozen Provel-topped pies,
online. Provel is sold in blocks, shredded, and in an extruded form that
looks like fresh pasta. It's also one of the thirteen styles featured at Tony's
Pizza Napoletana in San Francisco, CА.
300 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EQUIPMENT FOR CHEESE PREPARATION
When you're looking to shred or slice your cheese yourself, there are a
number of equipment options to get the job done. The results will vary,
1 Manual Cheese Grater: There are many forms of manual cheese
graters available. The most common is probably the box grater,
which typically has four sides with options for shredding and grating
chcese (some have up to eight sides with different purposes). Use
the largest-size hole for shredding softer cheeses like pizza cheese
and the smaller options for grating hard cheeses like pecorino
Romano. Some graters are a single sheet of metal with holes
punched in it that resembles a single side of a box grater with a
handle. You can also purchase rotary cheese graters with interchangeable drums that produce various sizes of shredded or grated
cheese. These typically can handle only small blocks of cheese at a
2
time and can be difficult to clean.
Food Processor: Most home food processors come with a shredder
blade that sits atop the food processor bowl. You can push blocks of
cheese through the feeder tube and the bowl will fill up with shredded cheese. Larger professional food processor models have a
chute that allows the shredded cheese to fall out of the side of the
machine into a receptacle of your choosing. The advantage to this
style of food processor is that you aren't constrained by the size of
the food processor bowl when it comes to how much cheese you
can shred. You can continuously feed blocks of cheese into the food
processor and then just change out the receptacle when it is full.
The force needed to push down on the cheese can change with the
height and strength of the pizza maker, which can change the thickness of the shred. There can be a greater usage of cheese when the
cheese isn't pushed down hard enough and it has a thinner shred.
Food processors usually work best with softer cheeses like pizza
cheese, although some models can grate harder cheeses like
Parmigiano-Reggiano.
however, and can impact how the cheese melts on your pizza. Be sure to
refrigerate your prepared cheese until you are ready to temper it.
3
(4
5
6
Cheese Slicer: The most common machine used in this category is
your standard deli slicer. It makes quick work of a log or brick of
cheese and is handy because you can easily adjust the thickness of
your slices. Other cheese-slicing machines include versions of the
one we found at Tony Gemignani's Pizza Rock. A wire slicer is a simple cheese-slicing tool for home use. It provides uniform cheese
slices but it will take longer to manually slice the cheese, and the
slices might be thicker than you'd like (unless you have an adjustable version that allows you to cut any thickness that you want). You
can also ask your local grocery store or deli to slice cheese to the
specifications you need.
French Fry Cutter: Usually used for making french fries, as the name
suggests, this is our favorite tool for cutting balls of fresh mozzarella.
The resulting pieces are of different sizes because we start with a
sphere rather than a rectangle, but the potato slicer makes 1.25 cm/
1/½ in pieces of mozzarella that we drain and then use on pizza.
Microplane: The Microplane company originally started out making
wooden rasps before they began manufacturing the stainless steel
graters that have become ubiquitous in professional and home
settings alike. Microplanes come in a variety of widths and hole sizes
and are typically used to finely grate foods frorn hard cheeses to
lemon zest to chocolate. They also have a four-sided box grater.
Vegetable Peeler: We use a vegetable peeler to add shavings of
hard cheeses after the pizza has come out of the oven.
CHEESE 301
9
ANTICAKING AGENTS IN SHREDDED MOZZARELLA CHEESE
Some brands of low-moisture part-skim mozzarella cheese contain
anticaking agents (such as cellulose and starch) to keep the cheese
from clumping. We found ourselves asking a lot of questions: Do these
cheeses melt or brown differently? Is there ataste difference? A stretch
difference? And finally, are anticaking agents even necessary?
In the photos below,three different cheese brands were baked on
New York pizzas for 5 minutes in a 315° C/600° F deck oven. Within 30
seconds of removal from the oven, a slice was cut and pulled from each
pizza to showcase the cheese stretch. It turned out that the cheese with
dispersed cornstarch was inferior-in melting, browning, and stretchingto both the cheese without additives and the one with cellulose. After we
tasted each pizza, the cornstarch cheese came out the loser again. It had
a tougher texture than the others, and a less appetizing flavor.
Since the shredded mozzarella with cellulose had similar results to
the shredded mozzarella with no additives, we went on to further test
whether the anticaking agent was even needed and, if so, the proper
amount. We mixed shredded pizza cheese along with dispersed 1.5%,
3%, and 4% microcrystalline cellulose, and tested it against the control
(without additives). Each sample was kept both cold (4° C/39° F) and
at room temperature (21°C/70°F) for 3 hours. At cold temperatures,
we observed no caking in any of the cheeses. At room temperature, the
shredded mozzarella with no additive massed together, making it more
difficult to scatter evenly. The cheeses dispersed with cellulose showed
no signs of caking at room temperature.After baking each percentage
of the dispersed anticaking agent, we preferred the option with 1.5%
microcrystalline cellulose since the higher amounts didn't provide any
added benefit.
When shredded pizza cheese is kept at room temperature, simply
disperse 1.5% microcrystalline cellulose in the cheese or find a storebought product containing the agent. If the cheese is held in cold conditions, a product without any additive is best for baking on pizza.
Pizza cheese with added cornstarch Pizza cheese with added cellulose Pizza cheese with no additives
DOES MOZZARELLA SHRED SIZE AFFECT PIZZA SURFACE COVERAGE AND MELTING?
When it comes to cheese-particularly the shape-we had a lot of
questions. What's the optimal amount and size of cheese for a given
pizza style? Will finely shredded cheese cover the same surface area as
coarsely shredded cheese? Do you need to compensate for any differences between them? Does sliced cheese brown more quickly than
shredded? We wanted answers!
We designed an experiment using a block of pizza cheese that we
divided in four different shapes: sliced to a typical thickness of 3 mm/
0.12 in, and shredded to three different sizes-fine, medium, and
coarse. Weighing out equal portions, we used each of the shapes to
top individual New York pizzas. For the shredded cheeses, we made
sure each pizza was covered completely, without any gaps. Then we
baked the pizzas for the same time and at the same temperature
(see photos below).
Regardless of the cheese size/shape we used, we got relatively similar
results in terms of melting and browning. Turns out that cheese sizesliced or shredded-isn't really an issue so long as you're controlling for
weight and baking conditions.
302
Fine Medium
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Coarse
APPLYING CHEESE TO YOUR PIZZA
Even though you can get good results whether you
slice or shred your cheese, how you apply it to the
pizza matters. If you want the cheese to completely
melt and/or brown, it needs to be in an even layer.
This brings us to one of our biggest pet peeves:
asymmetrical pizzas. Sure, pizzas have a somewhat
organic shape, but they're often shared. Who wants
an under-cheesed slice? Even if it's a one-person
pizza, you still don't want all the cheese on one side.
Strive for consistency.
For sliced cheese, aim for a single layer, overlaрping each slice slightly to prevent gaps. For shredded
cheese, apply in an even layer and don't overdo
it. It's okay to see some of the sauce. Typically,
shredded cheese will melt and cover small gaps.
Inexperienced pizza makers tend to add too much or
too little cheese, which can affect the way the pizza
bakes, customer satisfaction, and the bottom line
(see The Importance of Portioning, page 305). Also,
though it may seem hard to believe, there is such a
thing as too much cheese. (See the Argentinian al
molde pizzas on page 1:200.)
For hard cheese, grate it directly over the pizza
and distribute it evenly. These cheeses are usually
very flavorful, so you don't need much. They can be
applied before, during, or after baking, depending
on the flavor you're seeking. Using a vegetable peeler
to slice strips of very hard cheeses directly onto the
baked pizza can make for an elegant presentation.
Crumbled cheese (like blue cheese or feta)
should be distributed evenly, too, but with a
restrained hand. Remember, these tend to be strong
in flavor; don't carpet your pizza with blue cheese.
When using hand-torn or shredded fresh mozzarella, distribute it evenly over the sauce, but you
don't need to cover the entire surface. The cheese is
only one-third of the Neapolitan margherita pizza
experience. Make sure that even though these shapes
are organic, you are distributing them evenly and
symmetrically over the pizza.
Treat hand-cut or cubed cheese similarly to
shredded cheese. Lay it on in an even layer, but not
so heavily that you can't see the sauce or dough.
When it melts, the pizza will be covered.
Use a vegetable peeler on hard cheeses to
produce curls of cheese that you can apply to
the pizza after it bakes.
CHEESE 303
RECOMMENDED CHEESE AMOUNT BY PIZZA STYLE
How much cheese is enough? We did experiments for each type of pizza
to determine the optimal amount of cheese for each style. You'll see
specific amounts in our assembled iconic recipes in chapter 12 on page 3:3
that may differ slightly from the amounts below, but here are some general
guidelines. We don't include recommended amounts for al taglio pizza
here since the amount varies so much depending on whether you are
baking the cheese on the dough or applying after baking. See the Iconic
Recipes chapter starting on page 3:3 for more info on al taglio pizza.
Pizza style Dough weight Pizza size Recommended cheese type(s) Recommended weight
Thin-Crust Pizza 275 g 40 cm/16 in Shredded pizza cheese 150 g
see page 3:19 370 g
50 cm/20 in 270 g
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
see page 3:25
125 g 23 cm/9 in Shredded pizza cheese 175 g
250 g 40 cm/16 in 340 g
Deep-Dish Pizza 230 g 21 cm/8½ in Sliced skim low-moisture mozzarella 120 g
see page 3:93 Shredded pizza cheese 55 g
Sliced provolone 160 g
700 g 32 cm/122 in Sliced pizza cheese 255 g
Shredded pizza cheese 140 g
Sliced provolone 255 g
Neapolitan Pizza
see page 3:47
250 g 30 cm/12 in Fior di latte mozzarella or mozzarella
di bufala
100 g
New York Pizza 400 g 35 cm/14 in Shredded pizza cheese 195 g
see page 3:71
600 g 40 cm/16 in 290 g
800 g 45 cm/18 in 390 g
1 kg 50 cm/20 in 485 g
1.1 kg 55 cm/22 in 535 g
1.2 kg 60 cm/24 in 585 g
Artisan Pizza
see page 3:77
360 g 35 cm/14 in Shredded pizza cheese 180 g
400 g 40 cm/16 in 270 g
470 g
45 cm/18 in 360 g
500 g 50 cm/20 in 450 g
580 g 55 cm/22 in 495 g
620 g 60 cm/24 in 540 g
New York Square Pizza
see page 3:133
500 g 46 cm by 33 cm/18 in by 13 in Shredded pizza cheese 425 g
Detroit-Style Pizza
see page 1:109
330 g 25 cm by 20 cm/10 in by 8 in Shredded pizza cheese 60 g
Wisconsin brick cheese 115 g
500 g 35 cm by 25 cm/14 in by 10 in Shredded pizza cheese 115 g
Wisconsin brick cheese 225 g
304 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Artisan pizza with New York/artisan pizza
tomato sauce, braised short rib, sautéed
mustard greens, and shredded mozzarella
THE IMPORTANCE OF PORTIONING
If you're making pizza at home, do you need to have precise portions of
toppings? Not really, as long as you don't overdo it. Follow our commonsense steps in the chapter starting on page 3:3 and you'll be fine. If you
own a pizzeria, though, it's a different story. Properly portioned toppings
can be a big deal for three reasons: consistency, cost, and baking time.
Every restaurant wants repeat customers, and you better believe
they're going to want their favorite pizza to look and taste the same every
time. If the topping amounts vary, customers may begin to wonder what
they're getting for their money. More cheese than usual generally doesn't
result in complaints, but if there's less, you could havea problem. Some
customers will bring it to your attention. Others just won't come back.
Some might even tell their friends.
In terms of cost, occasionally putting an extra ounce of cheese on
top of a pizza may not seem like a big deal. But if you make dozens or
hundreds of pizzas a day, it quickly adds up. Among the three basic components of pizza (cheese, sauce, and dough), cheese can be the most
expensive. If you're running a restaurant, your profit margins are already
narrow. Don't set yourself back by giving away extra cheese. We recommend that you start with the outer rim, follow your sauce line, and then
work your way into the middle when you add cheese to pizza. Everything
tends to slide a little toward the middle as it bakes, which is why most
cooks end up with a red ring along the perimeter with no cheese (the
sauce then burns because it has no coverage and it looks like you burnt
the pizza). The pizza is also weakest in the middle; if there is cheese built
up in the middle, the pizza will be unintentionally soupy, or all the toppings will slide off when the customer tries to pick up a slice.
Using too much cheese can also impact production. When the
amount of cheese on the pizza varies, so will its baking time. Keeping the
weight ofthe cheese consistent helps you not only ensure each
pizza is cooked all the way through, but also maximize output
during busy service.
The first step is to identify how much cheese you want on each
pizza (see previous page). After that, you can control portions in several
different ways. The most precise is to pre-weigh all of the cheese into
stackable airtight containers and keep them in refrigeration. This requires
some upfront work, but once it is done, it's done. Another method is to
assemble each pizza on a scale. This allows you to precisely control the
weight of each ingredient you put on top. The downside is that it can be
awkward. Some scales aren't big enough for larger pizzas like New York,
and sliding a peel onto a scale can be cumbersome. To make using the
scale easier, you can assemble the pizza on a mesh pizza screen. This
allows you to easily slide it into the oven with no damage; unfortunately,
this can be a little more time consuming.
Though we prefer weighing ingredients, portioning by volume is
an option. First, decide on the weight of cheese you want on a specific
style of pizza. Then find a volume measure that will fit the cheese with as
much precision as possible. It can be a measuring cup or a soup bowl or
whatever you have. It should be loosely packed; tight packing will make
the cheese cluster. This method is the fastest and most efficient, but it's
also the least accurate.
Some cheeses make portioning simple. Fresh fior di latte mozzarella,
for example, comes in preportioned balls from the manufacturer. Many
pizzerias use one regular-size ball of mozzarella for each Neapolitan
pizza. No scales, no measuring cups, no guesswork. The downside to
this is that the cheese will not be properly drained and may produce a
soupy pizza.
LOW MOISTURE MOZZARELLA MOZZARELLA/WISCONSIN BRICK CHEDDAR
DETROIT 03/65/10 1959 NY 03/05/20 340
FIOR DI LATTE
100g NEAPOLITAN 3/25/20
LOW MOI STURE MOZZARELLA
1803 ARTISAN 03/05/20
CHEESE 305
9
CHOOSING YOUR OWN
CHEESE ADVENTURE
We know cheese helps make pizza delicious
and provides textural interest that adds to the
pleasure. That's from the eater's perspective. But
cheese has a functional perspective, too, and
knowing that will help you understand how to
build flavors and play with textures. Many classic
pizzas, like a New York slice or a Neapolitan
margherita, use a single type of cheese, but who
says you have to use just one type? The key is
knowing which cheeses combine well-that is
to say, which cheeses melt at more or less the
same rate. You can combine cheeses that don't
melt at the same rate, too, but you'll have to add
them to the pizza at different times. Here are our
suggested combinations.
CHEESES THAT CAN BE ADDED
DURING OR AFTER BAKING
Goat cheese (chèvre), Camembert, Brie, Époisses, fontina,
Taleggio, French münster, Roquefort, Stilton, Cabrales,
Gorgonzola, cream cheese, quark, ricotta, mascarpone,
crème fraîche, Ekte Gjetost
The ricotta on the prebaked al taglio pizza on page 3:146 helps to
affix the toppings to the pizza and is not baked again before serving.
BROWNING CHEESES THAT CAN
BE BAKED IN ANY COMBINATION
Cheddar, Colby, Monterey Jack / Pepper
Jack, Wisconsin brick cheese, American
muenster, low-moisture mozzarella, provolone, caciocavallo, scamorza, Edam,
gouda, Havarti, Emmental, Gruyère,
Comté, aged fontina
The star of the Don't Hold the Mustard Pizza
(see page 3:253) is the short rib pastrami, but
the Gruyère plays an important supporting
role in the flavor profile.
CHEESES USED FOR FLAVOR
Parmigiano-Reggiano, pecorino Romano,
Grana Padano, Asiago (d'Allevo), Manchego,
Idiazabal, Mahon, any smoked cheese (gouda,
provolone, mozzarella)
A combination of flavorful cheeses (Manchego and
goat cheese) come together on our Artisan Pizza on
page 3:77 and work to highlight the flavor of the figs
and prosciutto.
CHEESES USED AS THE
MAIN CHEESE LAYER
Pizza cheese, mozzarella di
bufala, fior di latte mozzarella,
cheddar, provolone, Provel,
Wisconsin brick cheese
One pizza that famously features
cheese as the main layer is
Detroit-style pizza (see page
3:109), which also has a frico crust
made out of Wisconsin brick
cheese and pizza cheese.
FLAVORFUL CHEESES
THAT DON'T MELT WELL
Goat cheese, Camembert,
Brie, Époisses, Taleggio, French
münster, Roquefort, Stilton,
Cabrales, Gorgonzola, cream
cheese, Ekte Gjetost
Goat cheese is one of the main
components that contributes to
the spring flavor profile of the Get
Your Goat Pizza on page 3:280.
CHEESES THAT CAN
BE ADDED BEFORE
OR AFTER BAKING
Parmigiano-Reggiano,
pecorino Romano, Grana
Padano, Asiago (d'Allevo),
Manchego, Idiazabal, Mahon
Our One in Ten Is Spicy Pizza
(see page 3:279) is finished with
shaved Manchego but you could
just as easily add the cheese
before baking.
CHEESES THAT PERFORM
WELL IN HIGHTEMPERATURE OVENS
Mozzarella di bufala, fior di
latte mozzarella, ricotta, mascarpone, crème fraîche
Fior di latte mozzarella or
mozzarella di bufala are optimal
choices for the classic Margherita Pizza (see page 3:47) that is
typically baked in a 425-480°C/
800-900°F oven.
CHEESES THAT CAN
DOUBLE AS A SAUCE
Quark, ricotta, mascarpone,
crème fraîche, sour cream
Our Raclette Pizza (see page 3:243)
uses crème fraîche as the sauce
base in combination with creamy
raclette, roasted fingerling potatoes, and caramelized onions.
At Apollonia's Pizzeria in Los Angeles, СА,
we indulged in some of the best Detroitstyle pizza in the United States. This slice
combined a lacy frico crust with mozzarella
and fresh ricotta to make for a delicious
combination of cheeses.
THE FUNCTIONAL QUALITIES OF
MELTED CHEESE
A cheese is melted when it no longer holds its original shape and the fat has softened. Not all cheeses
melt. Some will keep their shape no matter how hot
they get, like feta and Halloumi, while others will
melt but will turn into a puddle, like Brie. So are
there any universal principles for cheese on pizza?
In some ways, this is a tough question since the
desired outcome depends on the type of cheese. For
example, you wouldn't want ricotta to brown, but
browning can be desirable with other cheeses (see
page 319). Still, there are some aspects of cheese
melting that can be quantified. The apparent viscosity will let you know how toothsome the cheese
will be after melting. The flowability measures how
much the cheese spreads while melting.
The melt time is crucial to know. If the cheese
is shredded, it shouldn't hold a trace of its original
shape when it melts and, on most pizzas, the cheese
layer forms a homogeneous mass. (Pizzas like
Neapolitan margheritas are an exception; in those,
the cheese isn't going to cover the entire surface.)
As for browning, this is an interesting process.
Cheese browns once the surface gets hot enough,
which usually occurs well after the cheese has
melted. First, the water has to evaporate, which
occurs at 100°C/212°F. Once enough moisture
has evaporated to get the sugars and proteins on the
surface hot, browning can begin (as an example ofa Maillard reaction, see page 393).
And finally, the stretchability of a cheese is its
ability to form cohesive strings when it is extended,
as well as how long the strings can stretch before
they break.
308 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
CHEESE MELTABILITY AND BROWNING
There's nothing more gratifying than a lovely cheese pull on pizza, but not
all cheeses melt the same. Since choosing to bake the wrong cheese in the
high heat of a pizza oven can potentially ruin your pizza, we experimented
with different cheeses to better understand their melting and browning
characteristics. We found that the browning of mozzarella depends a lot
on the ingredients used and how the cheese is made (see page 319).
Cheese begins to melt at around 32°C/90°F; the milk fat melts,
and the cheese softens. The hydrophobic interactions between casein
molecules increase in the presence of heat and these interactions force
out water molecules. The space between casein molecules increases,
allowing milk fat to escape. The temperatures necessary for the rest of
the melting process depend on the specific type of cheese and its fat and
moisture content.
A cheese with a higher moisture content will have more loosely
packed milk proteins, which separate more easily when heated. We
confirmed this by comparing the melting and browning of wholemilk fresh mozzarella and low-moisture mozzarella (or pizza cheese).
The latter has less moisture to evaporate and browns more quickly on
Neapolitan pizzas. A cheese with more moisture, like fresh mozzarella, is
traditionally preferred on Neapolitan, since that cheese will take longer
to lose its moisture, therefore taking longer to brown.
Another interesting observation is that overall, softer cheeses first
melt, then the fat separates. (Although some cheeses, regardless of
whether they are soft, don't melt well.) Harder cheeses do the opposite: the oil separates first (which is undesirable for pizza), then melting
occurs. For example, Parmesan cheese has a great nuttiness and aged
cheese flavor. When baked, however, this hard and dry cheese will
become oily and greasy instead of creamy. In a hot oven it can brown
significantly before the dough is properly baked. This is why it's more
commonly used as a garnish after the pizza comes out of the oven.
Pizza cheese
Whole-milk fresh mozzarella
Cheese has to melt by typical mammal
body temperature since cows have about
the same body temperature as humans.
Parmigiano-Reggiano
CHEESE 309
9
COMMON CHEESE PROBLEMS
How you store your cheese will have a dramatic impact on how it
behaves when you assemble a pizza as well as how it bakes in the oven.
It can also promote the growth of unwanted molds. Keep your cheeses
well wrapped (or covered if they are shredded or grated) and in the
refrigerator when they are not being used in service.
Mold
Not all molds are bad. Some, in fact, are used for making cheese (and,
for that matter, mold was key to the development of penicillin). Eating
a little bit of unwanted mold on cheese isn't likely to cause problems in
healthy people. Yet many people see a little bit of mold on their cheese
and immediately throw it all away. With semihard, hard, and very hard
cheeses, that's not necessary. Mold can't penetrate very deep into these
cheeses, so just cut off the part that's molding, plus an extra margin of,
say, 3-6 mm//8-1/4 in. The rest will be fine. Make sure the knife doesn't
touch the mold so you don't accidentally spread it while you're cutting.
On the other hand, for soft cheeses like mascarpone or crème fraîche, it's
a good idea to just throw the whole thing away if you see mold. Mold is
a clue that the product is past its prime quality and maybe no longer safe
to consume.
Clumping
This typically happens with shredded cheeses when they're left out at
room temperature for too long. Try to keep these cheeses cold at all
times. If they've clumped from sitting out at room temperature and
they've been out for less than 2 hours, chill them again and break the
clumps apart by hand.
Slices Sticking Together
This occurs for the same reason as clumping. As the cheese softens, it will
stick to whatever it contacts. If you're careful about keeping the slices in
a single layer or placing parchment between slices when they're stacked,
you shouldn't have a problem.
Sweaty Cheese
This occurs with very hard, hard, and semihard cheeses. When they sit
out uncovered, they tend to sweat. This isn't a problem in and of itself,
but it does mean you've left your cheese uncovered and it will eventually
dry out. You should cover the cheese and keep it refrigerated. In the case
of sliced cheeses, separate the slices with parchment paper to keep them
from sticking.
310 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
VEGAN CHEESES
The quest for a flavorful, meltable, stretchable nondairy cheese has been
ongoing for years. While there are foods that seem sort of cheeselike
through a 21st century lens-fermented tofu, for example, which dates
back at least to 16th century China-the development of this sector has
largely been in the United States, according to the SoyInfo Center, which
published a 567-page book on the subject, documenting every alternative cheese it has come across.
The earliest commercially available example was developed in 1896
by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (of cereal fame), a member of the Seventh
Day Adventist church, which promotes vegetarianism. Called Nuttose,
it was made from peanuts. Throughout the early- and mid-20th century,
many of the commercially available cheese alternatives were made by
the Seventh Day Adventist community. Most of these "cheeses" were
actually tofu. By the 1980s, more commercial products were coming out,
but, unbeknownst to many consumers, many contained casein (see page
286), which gives cheese its melting properties but is made from milk, an
animal product.
Many of the early products just couldn't match real cheese. They
often hada waxy, chalky, and/or plastic-like texture, and didn't always
taste great, either. In recent years, as consumers have become more
interested in plant-based proteins, the quality and flavor have improved
dramatically and the options have expanded. Now, you can find vegan
cheeses made from many different sources: soy, almond, or rice milk;
Pizza styles
Neapolitan Pizza
see page 3:47
Recommended cheeses
Kite Hill ricotta
So Delicious mozzarella
When to apply
before baking
before baking
Good Planet Foods mozzarella before baking
New York Pizza
see page 3:71
Kite Hill ricotta before baking
Daiya mozzarella before baking
Good Planet Foods mozzarella before baking
Detroit-Style Pizza Kite Hill ricotta after baking
see page 3:109 So Delicious cheddar and mozzarella before baking
mixture
Good Planet Foods mozzarella before baking
New York pizza with Daiya mozzarella
nuts; seeds; tapioca; soybeans; coconut oil; and more.
A big challenge is making these nondairy cheeses behave like cheese
in the oven. To get around the casein problem, modern cheese makers use a blend of solids, fats, gums, and protein to try to replicate the
melting qualities and mouthfeel of dairy cheese. We conducteda round of vegan cheese tests from 10 different brands with a total of 22 cheeses,
including mozzarella, ricotta, cheddar, provolone, Parmesan, smoked
provolone, smoked gouda, Pepper Jack, and American. We baked the
cheeses on Neapolitan, New York, and Detroit-style pizzas.
The results ran the gamut. Some vegan cheeses didn't melt; others
turned out slimy after baking. Some turned very grainy in texture, with a
mouthfeel like grated Parmesan or cheese powder. Others leaked lots
of oil. Some came out of the oven looking almost fluorescent. Flavors
varied from neutral to, well, rather unusual. We have discerned coconut,
spice, or floral notes in some of these cheeses; others taste distinctly of
fermentation and acidity after baking.
With the vegan cheese market rapidly expanding (and additional
plant-based cheeses being developed), we expect more delicious vegan
cheeses to try in the future. These are our favorite vegan cheeses available where we live in the Pacific Northwest. We recommend trying a
bunch of the brands locally available to you since we found the taste and
texture varied widely from brand to brand.
Notes
taste and appearance nicely mimic ricotta; good tangy flavor
good melt and browning; decent mouthfeel; an unusual floral
flavor note
nice melt; decent texture; neutral flavor
decent ricotta texture and flavor; no melt
good flavor; slightly gummy texture
nice melt; decent texture; neutral flavor
good texture; good tangy flavor
good mimic of cheese; nice mouthfeel; tangy flavor
nice melt; decent texture; neutral flavor
CHEESE 311
THE ORIGIN OF CATUPIRY CHEESE
Catupiry is a soft, bright white processed cheese from Brazil-imagine
American cheese and Miracle Whip. It's in the "requeijão" or creamy
cheese family, so it's spreadable rather than sliceable. It's often extruded
onto pizza and is even sold in plastic piping bags or squeeze bottles just
for that purpose. Because it's heat sensitive, Catupiry is typically applied
after baking. It was invented in 1911 by an Italian immigrant named Mario
Silvestrini. We had it for the first time on our trip to Brazil (see page
1:190). According to the makers, the name catupiry means "excellent"
in the Tupí language spoken by the Tupinambá people of Brazil. Like
American cheese and Provel, it's a processed cheese and thus can't
legally be labeled "cheese" in the United States.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF FREEZING CHEESE
Although freezing works well to extend the shelf life of many foods,
freezing cheese can present some problems, depending on the type of
cheese and its moisture content. Ice crystals form in cheese when it's
stored in the freezer, which affects both the flavor and texture ofthe cheese when it's thawed. Because water expands when it freezes and
contracts as it thaws, the molecular structure of the cheese can break
down when the cheese is removed from the freezer.
We wanted to experiment to see which cheeses were capable of
withstanding freezer conditions. We tried freezing ricotta, fior di latte
mozzarella, sliced whole-milk fresh mozzarella, sliced pizza cheese,
shredded pizza cheese, sliced provolone, sliced cheddar, crumbled
Gorgonzola, and grated Parmesan.
Sliced cheeses were portioned and wrapped well in plastic wrap
before being placed in the freezer. Ricotta and fior di latte mozzarella
were frozen in the containers they were purchased in, and the shredded
pizza cheese, Gorgonzola, and Parmesan were portioned and placed in
tightly sealed zip-top bags before freezing. All cheeses were assessed at
6 weeks and 12 weeks. At each time point, the cheeses were thawed in
refrigeration for 1 day and then baked on pizzas.
After 6 weeks, the mozzarellas (other than fior di latte), provolone,
cheddar, and Parmesan cheeses behaved fairly normally both when we
tasted them raw and when we baked them. The soft cheeses-ricotta and
fior di latte mozzarella-had noticeable differences in their raw texture
compared to their texture before freezing. The ricotta was grainier and
yellow in color, and the fior di latte mozzarella was tough and slightly
crumbly when we tore it into pieces. Liquid seeped out of both soft
cheeses during baking, which made for soggier pizzas.
By 12 weeks, both soft cheeses were grainy when we tasted them raw.
Although they still wept some liquid, the liquid evaporated during baking in both cases. The semihard to hard cheeses (with the exception of
Parmesan, which savaw no obvious variation) performed well during bak
ing. We did see evidence of oil separation, however, signifying a collapse
of the protein matrix strength and its inability to hold on to the milk fat in
the cheese. This "oiling off" is an undesirable result for most pizzas.
The upshot: freezing cheese is a way of prolonging its shelf life, but
it comes at a price. It will likely change the cheese's desired properties
if stored for an extended period of time. We don't recommend freezing
softer cheeses like ricotta and fior di latte mozzarella. Semihard to hard
cheeses hold up much better, and we recommend storing them for 6 to
12 weeks.
While you can freeze some of the cheeses commonly used on pizzas with limited success, freezing artisan specialty cheeses like those pictured above and then baking them on pizza would not
work well (especially with the liquid nitrogen used to freeze the cheeses above).
312 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MODIFIED ATMOSPHERE PACKAGING FOR CHEESE
You can keep food spoilage at bay in a number of ways. Refrigeration is
the simplest because lower temperatures slow down the growth of most
microbes. Pickling, curing with salt, or adding artificial preservatives
works, too. To keep food fresh as long as possible without additives,
modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) is often used. This type of packaging contains a carefully controlled mixture of natural gases that inhibit
oxidation and the growth of microbes. Spoilage is reduced and shelf life
is increased.
How does MAP work with cheese? We experimented with carbon
dioxide, which is commonly used in packaging both fresh and shelfstable foods. It acts by excluding oxygen from the atmosphere inside
the storage container (called head-gas). When head-gas oxygen levels
are dropped below 2%, undesirable oxidation reactions can be greatly
decreased, resulting in longer shelf life.
We tested ricotta, fior di latte mozzarella, sliced whole-milk fresh
mozzarella, sliced pizza cheese, shredded pizza cheese, sliced provolone, sliced cheddar, crumbled Gorgonzola, and grated Parmesan. All
of the cheeses were stored in the refrigerator with the exception of the
fior di latte mozzarella and the sliced whole-milk fresh mozzarella. We
observed them at room temperature because that's what the pizzaioli in
Naples recommend for margherita pizzas. Because they weren't refrigerated, their shelf life was, of course, shorter.
Each cheese was removed from its original packaging, and samples
were placed in three different sealed bags: one zip-top bag filled with
air, one zip-top bag flushed with CO2 from a whipping siphon, and one
vacuum-sealing bag filled with CO2 from a gas tank (using a chamberstyle vacuum-packing machine, such as those used in delis or sous vide,
which often has a feature to do a gas flush from a tank of CO2). Cheeses
under refrigeration were evaluated and baked on pizzas at 1-week intervals for 6 weeks, while the cheeses at room temperature were evaluated
and baked on a pizza at 24-hour intervals for 4 days.
For the refrigerated cheeses, the zip-top bag with air gave the shortest
shelf life. Most of the cheeses started to taste a little sour and began to
mold once they hit 2 weeks. (The exceptions were ricotta and Parmesan,
which were still acceptable at 4 weeks.) The zip-top bag flushed with
CO2 extended the shelf life for most of the cheeses further, to over 3
weeks. The exceptions were the cheddar and provolone, which started
to show signs of mold right at the 3-week mark, and the shredded
low-moisture mozzarella,which showed mold at 2 weeks. The Cryovac
bag with CO2 extended the shelf life even further-all of the cheeses
lasted 5 weeks with no adverse effects during baking. At 6 weeks, we
observed all of the cheeses breaking during baking, with an excess of oil
separation. The breaking of the cheeses signified structural weakness,
making them less than ideal.
The three types of packaging performed similarly for the two cheeses
stored at room temperature-fior di latte mozzarella and whole-milk
fresh mozzarella slices-though the time period was compressed. The
zip-top bags with air lasted 2 days, although they were slightly sour
smelling by the end of the second day. The zip-tops with CO2 and
Cryovac with CO2 both extended the storage time at the same rate to
3 days. The Cryovac samples were better at maintaining the shape and
freshness of the cheeses. The most interesting find was on day 4 with the
Cryovac samples: both cheeses showed small bubbles of carbonation.
Once they were baked on the pizzas, it was still evident that the cheeses
were carbonated but it didn't give the pizza a bad flavor. We recommend
keeping these cheeses at room temperature in a Cryovac bag for no
more than 4 days.
Overall, these results confirmed previous scientific findings of extending storage time with the use of CO2 and MAP. If your cheese comes in
a block, you can also vacuum seal the block whole. If a vacuum sealer
and CO2 gas tank are not readily available to you, a zip-top bag with
siphoned CO2 is a great alternative when storing cheese.
3-week-old pizza cheese without and with CO₂ zip-top packaging
3-week-old provolone without and with CO₂ zip-top packaging 5-week-old Parmesan cheese with CO, vacuum-sealing packaging
CHEESE 313
9
MOZZARELLA
The very first mentions of pizza in Naples actually
do not talk about cheese at all (see pages 1:10-11).
Pizza in the late 1700s and early 1800s was more
often topped with tomato or small fish; the first
reference to cheese pizza dates to 1824. It's safe to
say that since then mozzarella has become the most
popular cheese used on pizza.
In the process of conquering the pizza world,
mozzarella evolved into a variety of different forms.
Today in Italy, it exists in several primary forms for the
pizzaiolo. The most common is fior di latte mozzarella
and mozzarella di bufala; there are also low-moisture
varieties, however, such as scamorza, caciocavallo, and
provolone (an aged pasta filata cheese). Fresh mozzarella and scamorza are also smoked to contribute a
different flavor profile on pizza.
Mozzarella, as befits a cheese that possibly dates
back to the 12th century (see page 316), can be made
with no special equipment and in very small batches.
It's a perfect cheese for small artisanal production. It's
not surprising that fresh mozzarella was first manufactured in the United States by Italian immigrants over
a hundred years ago in the Midwest.
As pizza became popular in the United States and
manufacturers wanted to ship mozzarella across the
country, the style changed and the most common
cheese became low-moisture mozzarella. Anyone
who tries low-moisture mozzarella, then fresh mozzarella will scarcely believe the two are same kind of
cheese, yet the process to make them is very similar.
And low-moisture mozzarella is itself very similar
to scamorza and caciocavallo when it bakes (see
page 298). Pizzaioli in Italy primarily use fresh mozzarella, though some use low-moisture cheese like
scamorza and caciocavallo. The usage in the United
States is the opposite; here, pizzaioli primarily use
pizza cheese (low-moisture mozzarella), while some
pizza makers use fresh mozzarella.
All of the aforementioned cheeses are part of a
group known as pasta filata cheeses, or "spun paste"
cheese. To make these cheeses, curds are heated
in hot water or other liquids and then manually
or mechanically stretched and kneaded (or spun).
This creates the stringy cheese that everyone
knows. There are basically two ways to make mozzarella from scratch: One is by direct acidification,
in which the milk is mixed with rennet and citric
acid, heated to form curds, and then stretched to
form cheese. The second method also involves
rennet, but instead of citric acid, a culture is used.
In all of our tests, we preferred the direct acidification method. The two approaches produced
similar mozzarellas; direct acidification is simpler
and takes a fraction of the time but doesn't melt
as well as mozzarella made with cultures. We
preferred using nonhomogenized whole cow's
milk for fior di latte mozzarella (see page 324) and
whole buffalo's milk for mozzarella di bufala (see
page 328). Note that homogenized milk will not
form curds. There's also a third method for making
mozzarella that allows you to skip some of the initial steps: buy the curds and then shape the cheese
(see page 319). This method, frankly, is the easiest
and fastest of all.
Low-moisture mozzarella is sometimes
sold as "pizza cheese."This cheese is
made with low-fat milk (about 1.8% fat)
and a thermophilic starter that includes
Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus spp. The curds are warmed to lower
temperatures (70°C/158° F) and the
cheese is stretched and kneaded more
extensively than fresh mozzarella. The
result is a harder cheese that's molded
into rectangular blocks while warm. The
cheese is then brined in salt water (or,
alternatively, it's salted during the stretching and kneading process). It's made in a
way that's similar to making cheddar.
The word "mozzarella" derives from the
Italian word mozzare, which means "to
cut off."The name is apt.When making
fresh mozzarella, the cheese maker uses
the index finger and thumb to squeeze off
pieces of the formed mozzarella, giving
the portions a roundish shape.
Once we started researching, we found that
many Italian mozzarellas have comparable
forms in the United States. We grouped the
common forms of mozzarella in Italy and the
US, along with their moisture contents below.
AVAILABLE IN ITALY
Mozzarella
di bufala:
58%
moisture
content
Fior di latte
mozzarella:
58%
moisture
content
AVAILABLE IN THE UNITED STATES
Local or
imported
fresh mozzarella:
58% moisture
content
Scamorza:
45-52%
moisture
content
Caciocavallo:
35-40%
moisture
content
Pizza cheese
(low-moisture
mozzarella):
45-52% moisture
content
Smoked scamorza:
~43-50% moisture content
CHEESE
9
Smoked mozzarella:
~43-50% moisture content
315
MOZZARELLA THROUGH THE AGES
Mozzarella di bufala is considered by many to be the best cheese for
making Neapolitan pizza, although how water buffalo arrived in Italy is a
matter of speculation (see page 1:15). But mozzarella itself precedes the
presence of water buffalo in Italy. It is, in fact, an ancient style of fresh,
pressed cheese possibly dating back to the ancient Romans and made
with the milk of cows, water buffalo, and even sheep.
CA. 50 СE
Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella wrote in De Re
Rustica about a cheese-making technique in which
hot water was added to curds and then the curds
were molded by hand or placed in a wooden box.
12TH CENTURY
Documents specify that monks from the monastery of
San Lorenzo in Capua offered "mozzarella or provatura
with a piece of bread" to pilgrims who visited the church
annually.
MID-TO LATE 15TH CENTURY
Provatura cheese made with buffalo's milk appeared in
recipes for ravioli and two different tortes in Il Cuосо
Napoletano (The Neapolitan Recipe Collection).
1816
The production of mozzarella and provole began in Acerra,
Bisaccia, Cerignola, Aversa, and Cardito.
1824
The first description
of savory pizza
baked with oil, lard.
mozzarella, and
caciocavallo was
found in the play Le
Ridicole Operazioni,
o sia Pulcinella
Vendicato.
Costumi
POL
E CONTORNI
Dyera dire
FRANCESCO BOURCARD
1847-1866
The first time mozzarella was mentioned
with regard to pizza
was in Usi e costumi
di Napoli by Francesco de Bourcard.
Vincent Formusa
IMPORTATORE DI PRODOTTI ITALIANI
CHICAGO, ILL.
OLIO P'OLIVA VINCENZO FORMU
PASTE ALIMENTARI DELLA TRADIZIONALE
INCANESTRATI, BUPPALI & CACIOCAVALLI
SARDELLE. ACCIUGHE SALATE, CARCIOFI
one esciusive di Termini Imerese.
1861
The Tour de Monde, a guidebook written in
French, printed a description of a pizza that
included herbs, anchovies, prosciutto, mozzarella, and spices. The German magazine Globus
printed a similar description of garlic, vegetables,
sardines, ham, mozzarella, and spices on the pizza.
Riethe ALLEVA oахe
1892
Piem
IM FRESH
Pina and Francesco "Frank" Alleva opened Alleva
Dairy, now the oldest cheese store in the United
States, in Manhattan's Little Italy.
1918
The Italian Chamber Bulletin newspaper in Chicago
included an early ad for buffali, or buffalo cheese,
demonstrating the growing Italian community and
the demand for Italian food products in the US.
1524
Provatura appeared in
recipes for a torte called
picza figliata and for
ravioli in the Manoscritto
Lucano, a collection of recipes published in Nerola,
outside of Rome.
1557
Cheese made from buffalo's milk was mentioned
in IDiscorsi di M.Pietro. It was called mozze in
Naples and provature in Rome.
1570
M.BARTOLOMEO
SCAPPI.
The term "mozzarella" was used for the first time in
Opera di M. Bartolomeo Scappi. The text differentiated
between fresh mozzarella and neve di latte, today's
fior di latte mozzarella. Scappi was the personal chef
to two popes.
1726
The play Delle Commedie di Giovanbattista de la Porta provided a description of
provatura, provola, and mozzarella.
1848
The encyclopedia L'Omnibus
Pittoresco first mentioned
both tomato and mozzarella as
ingredients on pizza.
NGS BANKS.
1860
The London Chronicle published the first
non-Italian description of Neapolitan pizza, complete with tomato and mozzarella (described as
"nothing more than rich cream, beaten almost
like a cream cheese") as ingredients.
1861
Italy became a country in 1861 following a long unification process,
known as the Risorgimento, which
consolidated the many different
states of the Italian peninsula under
a single government.
1861
After the unification of Italy, a wholesale market
for mozzarella and ricotta known as the Taverna
was formally established in Aversa.
1975
Dr. Hugh Popenoe, in a partnership with the University of
Florida, established the first modern commercial herd of water
buffalo in the country. At its peak, it counted 800 head of
water buffalo that were used on and off for dairy production.
mfalo
mozzarella
di bufala campana
1996
Mozzarella di bufala received a
DOP (Denominazione d'Origine
Protetta [protected designation
of origin]) designation from
the Italian government. It is
regulated by the Consorzio di
Tutela della Mozzarella di Bufala
Campana DOP.
OPTIONS FOR USING FRESH MOZZARELLA ON PIZZA
You have a few options for manipulating your mozzarella before using
it on pizza. We recommend that you stretch mozzarella curd because
you'll get a better pizza, but you don't need to ball it. The table below
outlines the different ways that you can treat mozzarella before you.use
PREPARATION
Mozzarella curds
Use mozzarella curds on pizza
Soak mozzarella curds in brine
before using
Stretched mozzarella
Cut premade mozzarella balls
and drain
Bulk stretch premade curds
Stretch premade curds and form
into balls
NOTES
it, in order of how long it takes to prepare the mozzarella before baking.
This table assumes that you are using premade mozzarella curds, but we
also provide a recipe for how to make your own (see page 324).
Store-bought or homemade curds can be put directly on the pizza, but note that curds brown more, have a
bland flavor, and are spongy in texture.
Soak the curds in brine for 1-7 d to help improve the flavor. Drain the curds before use. Soaking the curds in
brine, then draining will not only improve the flavor, but also transform the texture to have a smoother/more
stretchy bite with much less browning during baking. This won't give you an identical result to pizzas made with
stretched fresh mozzarella, but it is a good alternative.
Many pizzerias buy mozzarella balls and then cut them or hand-tear them before using on pizza. You can purchase mozzarella balls in different weights and sizes. They are typically stored in whey or brine or in plastic (see
page 320). Cut the balls and then drain overnight (or for at least 12 h). You can save significant time if you vacuum
drain the mozzarella (see page 321)
Another option is to purchase mozzarella curd, stretch it in hot water, and then leave it as a whole mass rather
than shaping it into balls. Before you use it on pizza, shred or cut it and then drain it.
Pizza makers sometimes want to stretch their own cheese (they are not making their own cheese from scratch,
just stretching it). They purchase mozzarella curds, place them in hot water, stretch it, and then ball it. You have
to shred or mechanically cut it and then drain it before using them on pizza.
Store-bought fresh mozzarella balls
Store-bought fresh mozzarella
balls, cut and drained
Fresh mozzarella curds
318
Fresh mozzarella
curds, cut
Fresh mozzarella curds, bulk
stretched, cut, and drained
Fresh mozzarella curds,
cut and brined
Fresh mozzarella curds, stretched
into balls, cut, and drained
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
MAKING MOZZARELLA
Mozzarella curd is produced when milk is heated
and acidified, either through fermentation with LAB
cultures or directly with citric acid. Then rennet is
added to cause coagulation. The pH will fall and,
once it reaches a pH of 5.3-5.1 (see page 292), the
curd may immediately be stretched into mozzarella
(known as the filature step). The tangled mass of
casein complexes that forms the curd is steeped in a
bath of very hot whey or water. After a short period
of time, the curds are kneaded within the water and
the stretching begins, which forms the curd into а
soft, elastic, stringy texture.
As we were experimenting and developing our
mozzarella recipes, we asked ourselves a series of
questions. Is stretching mozzarella curd worth the
effort? Does balling the resulting cheese matter?
Can we simply bake mozzarella curd on a pizza? Our
experiments led to several interesting conclusions.
The first is that we highly recommend stretching
mozzarella curd. Seasoned, drained curd can be
used on pizza instead of mozzarella, but you need
to manage your expectations. Baking the curd will
increase browning moderately (this browning may
bother some pizzaioli more than others) and the
result will lack the nice stringy pull typically desired
on the pizza. Furthermore, curds aren't commonly
seasoned with salt, so they can be very bland. Could
we troubleshoot both of these problems? Our procedure for brining the curd on the previous page can
mitigate the browning issue and improve the flavor.
But ultimately, we think that you should stretch your
curds. We recommend limiting the stretching to two
to three times, however, since overstretching can
result in a tougher texture. As soon as a nice sheen
has developed from stretching, your mozzarella is
ready to use.
Contrary to popular practice, you don't need to
ball mozzarella. As long as you stretch the curd, the
shape you give to your cheese is not important. A
ball is a traditional way of shaping mozzarella cheese,
but it is by no means essential, especially if you plan
to rip your cheese into pieces or cut it before using.
Ifyou are stretching large amounts of mozzarella, we
recommend using our method for bulk-stretching
mozzarella on page 326. There appears to be a
predominantly American phenomenon where
pizzerias buy the curd and then stretch and ball
the mozzarella themselves. This certainly has a few
practical aspects. It's simpler to do that than make it
from scratch and the curd lasts longer.
Regardless ofwhether you are using curd or
mozzarella, draining is a crucial step before baking
to avoid ending up with a soupy pizza. Drain it for
a minimum of 12 hours or overnight under refrigeration. If you are in a pinch, we suggest pressing a
ball of mozzarella between paper towels or a clean
kitchen towel to force out some of the moisture in
the cheese, then tearing and placing it on a pizza just
before baking. You can also save a bunch of time by
vacuum-draining a batch of mozzarella and keeping
it refrigerated. You'll always have ready-to-bake
mozzarella if you use that method (see page 321).
Braiding stretched mozzarella makes for
a beautiful presentation offior di latte
mozzarella. While this shaping method works
well for appetizers and salads, it doesn't
make sense for pizza because you end up
just shredding and draining fresh mozzarella
before baking.
When you need to warm your curds
and whey to a specific temperature (see
page 328), a yogurt incubator or sous
vide machine would work well. Dehydrators can work if you turn them down
very low and seal your bowl to prevent
evaporation.
You'll have your hands in very hot water
when you are stretching your mozzarella curd, so you might want to use
thick kitchen gloves to protect yourself
(the disposable ones don't work as
well).
9
BAKING MOZZARELLA AT LOW TEMPERATURES
It is commonly assumed that only fresh mozzarella can be baked in
Neapolitan-style ovens, which operate at 425-480°C/800-900° F.
Some pizzaioli also believe that this type of mozzarella doesn't function
as well when it is baked at lower temperatures. We tested a number of
mozzarella permutations on a variety of pizza styles that are baked at
different temperatures.When baking at 288-315° C/550-600° F, we
saw no difference between store-bought mozzarella, the curd that was
stretched and balled, and the curd that was stretched in bulk. If you
would like to bake unstretched curd, soaking it in brine will improve its
flavor and its melt.
Thin-crust pizza topped
with curds, baked at
288°C/550° F
Thin-crust pizza topped
with mozzarella that was
stretched, balled, and
cut, baked at 288° C/
550°F
Thin-crust pizza topped
with mozzarella that was
stretched and then cut,
baked at 288°C/550° F
Thin-crust pizza topped
with mozzarella that was
balled and cut, baked at
288°C/550°F
Thin-crust pizza topped
with brined curds, baked
at 288°C/550°F
CHEESE 319
Our standard mozzarella brine contains
1% salt and 0.06% calcium lactate.
STORING MOZZARELLA
When we visited Italy, we heard mixed messages
about the best temperature to store fresh mozzarella.
Some pizzaioli claimed that you would ruin it ifyou
put it in the refrigerator (likely lore that was passed
down through the generations), while others drain
their mozzarella under refrigeration and then temper
only the amount that they'll need for service. Even
in Naples, where dough isn't typically refrigerated
(see page 88), the cheese almost always is. As Americans, we found this interesting since all imported
mozzarella cheese comes to us refrigerated, so
this is the only way we've experienced it. Local or
domestic fresh mozzarella is also always refrigerated regardless of whether the cheese is for home
or restaurant use.
As the cheese ages (whether at room temperature
or not), it will become more sour as the lactic acid
builds. There will be a variety of changes to the
texture, the primary ofwhich is that it will get softer.
We discerned no advantages in taste or quality with
storing mozzarella at room temperature when compared to storing it in refrigeration. Fresh mozzarella
can withstand being stored at room temperature for
up to 3 days (you can extend this to 4 days if you use
our vacuum-sealing bag MAP technique on page
313). The shelflife for our homemade Uncultured
Fior di Latte Mozzarella (see page 324) increases to
1 week in the refrigerator, which is why we suggest
that you keep your mozzarella cold.
Another important decision to make is the
storage environment. The three most common
ways of storing whole fresh mozzarella are in plastic
wrap, in brine, or in the mozzarella's own whey.
After taking a closer look at the role these storage
conditions play for our in-house fresh mozzarella,
we observed a link between storage conditions
and water within the cheese: storing mozzarella
in liquids makes it swell over time, with brined
mozzarella swelling more due to osmosis. The
brined mozzarella also tends to release its moisture
very reluctantly, which is likely due to the salt that's
absorbed into the cheese.
If you have made your own mozzarella, we recommend brine for storing it and we have included
this step in our mozzarella recipes. Just make sure to
drain it overnight before baking or you'll get a soupy
pizza (or you can vacuum drain it; see next page).
Additionally,brining will give your cheese shelf
stability by inhibiting bacterial growth. Remember:
even a cheese produced with the greatest care will
degrade quickly if it's not properly stored.
SEPARATING WHEY FROM FAT IN FRESH MOZZARELLA
Cheese is technically an emulsion (see page 259) of whey and butterfat,
and this emulsion is unstable upon heating. If you've ever had a fondue
party and not kept an eye on your fondue pot, you know exactly what
this means: the emulsion breaks and the oil seeps out. This isn't typically
a result you want, but curiosity got the better of us and a question arose
within our team: Is there a way to get the butterfat out of the mozzarella
without heating it? Brute-force methods immediately came to mind.
Cheese is essentially composed of three types of particles based on
density: heavier milk solids, whey (about 1 g/cm³), and fat (about 0.9 g/
cm³). We were able to split them using the centrifugation principle.
Furthermore, we were able to squeeze fat out of freeze-dried mozzarella
using compressive force provided by a 20-ton heavy-duty hydraulic press.
320
Solids Fat Whey
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
READY-TO-BAKE FRESH
MOZZARELLA
Our usual procedure for draining fresh mozzarella
is to place the cheese on a lint-free paper towel,
cover it, and let it rest 12 hours (or overnight)
under refrigeration. Other methods that work well
include placing the cut pieces of cheese in a cheesecloth-lined strainer placed over a bowl or placing the
cheese in a perforated hotel pan fitted over another
same-sized unperforated hotel pan, which will
collect the drained liquid. Both methods require 12
hours under refrigeration.
We wondered ifthere was another way to remove
the moisture if you are in a hurry. It is possible to
have either forgotten to drain the cheese or not
drained enough ofit (e.g., you run out mid-service).
We found out there is an option that you can use in
an emergency. You can wrap your mozzarella ball or
rectangle in a clean kitchen towel or a lint-free paper
towel and squeeze it to force out some ofthe moisture
in the cheese. Then you just need to tear or cut it
immediately after, directly over the sauced pizza, and
it will bake with very good results (see photos below).
This method is handy but not practical for preparing
large amounts of drained fresh mozzarella cheese.
This led us to think about developing a method
to quickly make a ready-to-bake fresh mozzarella.
Which also led us to ask, had someone else thought
of the idea of selling already cut-and-drained fresh
mozzarella? We were not able to find any source that
provides this very valuable service and we thought
that there had to be a reason for it. It is a lot of work
to cut large quantities of fresh mozzarella cheese and
then drain it. After all, you can get shredded pizza
cheese or you can get it in a whole log and shred it
yourself, possibly using a machine to cut down on
time and labor. So ready-to-bake mozzarella is not
unheard of when it comes to low-moisture mozzarella cheese (and many pizzerias use it).
But our task was to develop a procedure for
ready-to-bake fresh mozzarella. What we ended up
doing consists of placing your cut mozzarella onto
a liquid-absorbing pad (like the absorbent pads
packed with a cut of meat), vacuum-packaging the
bag, and then pulling a full vacuum. The pressure
from sealing the cheese will push out the moisture
and the meat pad absorbs the liquid coming off the
cheese. You can then store your mozzarella under
refrigeration until you are ready to bake (but not
beyond its original expiration date). The results were
fantastic. The cheese bakes exactly like traditionally
cut and drained fresh mozzarella and the best part
is that this method can easily be scaled up to large
quantities of cheese.
Mozzarella di bufala is fresh mozzarella
made with water buffalo's milk (not
the milk of American bison/buffalo). It
has a distinctive sour flavor, almost like
unsweetened yogurt. Some pizzaioli
use only this type of cheese, while
others say that it's a waste to bake it
on a pizza and instead use fior di latte
mozzarella. It may bea taste preference
or a matter of cost (mozzarella di bufala
is more expensive), but we found that
both beliefs are typically strongly held.
The amount of moisture that mozzarella loses during draining reduces over
time. This characteristic aligns with our
observation of increased homogeneity
over time. The water migrates more
evenly through the cheese as it ages.
Mozzarella drained as normal Whole mozzarella ball squeezing with a
towel ("emergency draining" procedure)
Pre-cut mozzarella vacuum-sealed using
meat pads (ready-to-bake mozzarella)
As evidenced by these photos, the different methods for
draining mozzarella produce very similar baked pizzas. The big
difference is the time that it takes to drain the mozzarella; the
vacuum-drained mozzarella saves you 12 hours.
CHEESE 321
THE EFFECTS OF AGING ON MOZZARELLA
Draining and aging have a two-pronged effect on mozzarella. Mozzarella
softens as it ages, producing a better melt when baked on pizza. This
happens sooner in drained mozzarella when compared to undrained
mozzarella. We recommend using 10-day-old fior di latte mozzarella
that has been drained overnight or 16-day-old mozzarella di bufala that
has been drained overnight for your pizza. Keep in mind that these findings are separate from our storage recommendation, which is to keep
the mozzarella in brine.
DRAINED
Day 5 Day 10
The texture of mozzarella di bufala softens significantly over the course of 30 days.
UNDRAINED
Day 5 Day 10
Day 16 Day 24 Day 30
Day 16
Note how the shape of mozzarella di bufala goes from nearly round (day 5-16) to oval (day 24-30). Not surprisingly, while the cheese
softens over time, it also has the tendency to set and lose its shape under the effect of gravity.
Note that the texture of the melted mozzarella becomes more
uniform over time.
Day 24 Day 30
Day 16, undrained Day 16, drained Day 24, undrained
AGED VS FRESH MOZZARELLA
When you sample freshly made cheese at a mozzarella factory in Italy, the fresh mozzarella can have a
squeaky feel when you bite into it (the sound when
you eat it is kind of like sneakers on a basketball
court). The stretching of the melted curd creates
a fibrous texture that can rub together when you
chew it. There is little, if any, sour/lactic acid taste.
But if you taste a very fresh mozzarella side by side
with a week-old one, you may notice a softer, more
even texture as well as a more complex flavor in the
aged cheese.
In his 2012 New York Times Magazine article, Sam
Anderson describes mozzarella di bufala evocatively:
"Buffalo mozzarella is the apotheosis of dairy:
the golden mean between yogurt and custard and
cottage cheese and heavy cream and ricotta. It lives
(along with clouds and mercury and lava and photons and quicksand) on the mystical border between
solid and liquid. Descriptions of it tend toward
poetry." This is a fair, ifa bit romantic, description of
the mozzarella di bufala you can sample after it has
traveled to the United States. Based on what we ate
at the mozzarella manufacturers in Naples, this is not
the flavor and texture that it has at its early stages.
It's what fresh mozzarella di bufala will turn into
eventually. But when, and how?
When we talked to pizzaioli in Naples about the
age of their mozzarella, some were firm about using
the freshest mozzarella (this is feasible because
it's readily available to them). But many said that
they didn't receive daily mozzarella deliveries. This
inspired us to create a series of experiments to
find out the storage window for fresh mozzarella
that optimizes both flavor and texture. We have
examined refrigerated fior di latte mozzarella, fior
di latte mozzarella stored at room temperature, and
refrigerated mozzarella di bufala, consuming a total
of 77 balls of fresh mozzarella!
Our conclusions were thought-provoking.
Whether you are using fior di latte mozzarella or
mozzarella di bufala for your Neapolitan pizza, you'll
get a softer, more uniform texture if you let the
cheese mature. The flavor benefits as well; we prefer
7-to13-day old fior di latte mozzarella (our favorite
pizza was made with 10-day-old cheese) and 16- to
24-day old mozzarella di bufala (our favorite pizza
used 16-day-old cheese) over freshly made mozzarella. The cheese on these pizzas had a perfect pull,
a cohesive melt, a softer structure, and a delicious
flavor. Room-temperature storage has no notable
advantages in our opinion, and it is limited to 3 days
(see page 313). Draining is recommended in general
for a better cheese melt: the photos on the previous
page show that the drained mozzarella had a better
consistent melt about a week sooner than undrained.
If you are importing mozzarella di bufala from
Italy, which can take some time, or when you don't
have access to the freshest mozzarella possible, this
might actually be a blessing. We fully acknowledge
that this opinion is contrary to what many pizza
makers do in practice and that this result is based on
our personal preference. We encourage you to give it
a try and decide for yourself.
Mozzarella can be shaped into pieces that are
just large enough for a single Neapolitan pizza:
some pizzaioli use them for portion control in
their restaurants. Larger pieces of mozzarella
can be tied at one end and hung up to age in
order to make the scamorza shown above. This
process gives the mozzarella a firmer texture;
scamorza is also often smoked.
CHEESE 323
UNCULTURED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA
Why would you make something like mozzarella rather than buy it premade? One reason might
be that you can't get it (or you can't get a product of the quality that you want). Another is that
you want to do something different on your pizzas. We contend that it's fun to make cheese and
making it lets you experience that ingredient on a whole new level. Once you do start making
it, that gives you an opportunity to make something very different that you can't buy, like our
infused mozzarella (see page 336) or higher fat mozzarella (see page 334).
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Citric acid 7.5 g 11/2 tsp 0.19
Water, cool 60 g 14 cup 1.56
Nonhomogenized whole cow's milk
(~3.25% fat)
3.84 kg 1 gal + 2/3cup
100
Liquid animal rennet
For forming the mozzarella
1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
Water 3 kg 3 qt+1 cup 100
Fine salt 150 g 1/½ cup + 23/ tsp 5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt +2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 1
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/½ tsp 0.06
Forwhere to purchase cheese-making supplies, see Resources, page 3:377.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1% h
~600 g curds
Overstretching the mozzarella (handling it too much)
can result in a tougher final texture.
The water for the stretching process is quite hot, so
either double up the gloves on your hands or purchase sugar-pulling gloves.
You'll notice that the method for shaping the mozzarella into balls is optional in step 18. We found that
there is no qualitative difference in baking shaped
mozzarella and you can save yourself the time and
effort. We havea method for bulk stretching a large
batch of mozzarella on page 326 that allows you to
stretch the mozzarella and then cut and drain it for
service.
HOW TO Make Fior di Latte Mozzarella
There are various ways of making mozzarella from scratch. We recommend making mozzarella by direct acidification (without culture)
because it is the fastest method for making the cheese. You can also start
from store-bought mozzarella curds. If you decide to use this method,
start at step 11 in the following how-to. You can use this stretching
method for cheddar curds as well, but keep in mind that your "cheddarella" will be a little firmer.
5 8a
1 Dissolve the citric acid in the water in a
large stainless steel saucepot.
2 Whisk in the milk gently.
3 Warm over medium-low heat to 32°C/
90°F, stirring occasionally.
4 Remove the pot from the heat.
5 Gently stir in the rennet with an up-anddown motion, about 10 s.
6 Cover the pot and leave undisturbed for
5 min.
324 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
8b
7
Check the curd for clear separation. If the
curd has not separated easily from the
whey, cover the pot and let it sit for an
additional 5-10 min.
8 Cut the curd with a long knife or thin metal
spatula into 1.25-2.5 cm / 1/½–1 in squares.
11
9 Return the pot to the stove and heat to
43° C/110°F while gently stirring the
curds.
10 Remove the pot from the heat and continue slowly stirring for 2-5 min.
11 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
12 Drain the curds for 20 min.
13 For forming the mozzarella, heat the
water to 88°C/190° F in a medium
saucepot. Add the salt. If not serving the
mozzarella right away, prepare two
water baths, one at 13°C/55°F and one
at 4.4°C/40° F.
14 Place half of the strained curds (or whatever you feel comfortable with handling
at one time) in a large stainless steel
bowl.
15 Gently pour the hot salt water down the
side of the bowl (not directly on top of
the curds) until the curds are covered.
Let sit undisturbed for 2 min.
16 17 22
16 Knead the mixture to form one large
mass of mozzarella within the water.
18
17 Stretch the mozzarella 2-3 times. At each
stretch pull the cheese about 60 cm/
2 ft in length,then place the two ends
together and pull to stretch the cheese
again. If the water becomes too cool and
the mozzarella is not stretching easily,
drain the bowl and replace with new hot
water. The target curd temperature fora proper stretch is 57° C/ 135° F.
Once a nice sheen has developed from
stretching, form balls, if desired, by taking
a stretched section of the curds and folding it underneath itself to about 5 cm/
2 in. in diameter, then with your index
finger and thumb, pinch together one
end and tear or cut off.
20 Transfer the mozzarella to the 4.4° C/
40° F bath for 10 min to keep their shape.
19 Place the mozzarella in the 13°C/55°F
water bath for 5 min.
21 For storing the mozzarella, stir together
the water, salt, and calcium lactate in an
airtight plastic container.
22 Place the chilled mozzarella in the storage bath.
23 Store for up to 1 wk in refrigeration.
Neapolitan pizza with smoked provolone, fior di latte mozzarella,
pickled Peppadew peppers, and fresh basil
CHEESE 325
9
BULK STRETCHED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
SCALING % ☑
Active 20-30 min/
Inactive 35-40 min
~4.54 kg curds
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME
For forming the mozzarella
Water 5 kg 5 qt + 134 cups 100
Salt 250 g 3/4 cup +3 Tbsp 5
Fior di latte mozzarella curds* 4.54 kg 4 qt +3 cups 100
For storing the mozzarella
Water
Salt
Calcium lactate
6 kg 6 qt + 2 cups 100
60 g 3 Tbsp +13¼ tsp
3.6 g 11/½ tsp 0.06
*Follow steps 1-12 ofthe Uncultured Fior di LatteMozzarella recipe on page324 ifyou wunt to make the
mozzarella curds. You could also use store-bought curds.
The water for the stretching process is quite hot, so
either double up the gloves on your hands or purchase sugar-pulling gloves.
While many pizzerias shape their mozzarella into
balls (often for portion control), it really isn't necessary. We store balled mozzarella and bulk mozzarella
overnight, and then cut it, drained it, and baked it
side by side on the pizza. There was absolutely no
difference between the two cheeses.
1
PROCEDURE
2
For forming the mozzarella, heat the water
to 77° C/170° F in a large rondeau or stock
pot. Add the salt.
For storing the mozzarella, stir together the
water, salt, and calcium lactate in an airtight
plastic container. Refrigerate until needed.
3 Prepare a 10-15 cm/ 4-6 in deep full hotel
pan with 6-7 L of ice water. Have a10-15
cm/4-6 in deep half hotel pan nearby for
holding the shaped mozzarella.
4 Break apart any large chucks of curd and
place all of the curds into the warm water.
5 Let sit for 5-10 minutes without stirring to
soften.
6
7
Knead the mixture to form one large mass
of mozzarella within the water. If the water
becomes too hot to handle, you can turn
the water down to 54-60°C/130-140° F.
Stretch the mozzarella 3 times. At each
stretch pull the cheese about 60 cm/2 ft in
length, then place the two ends together
and rotate 90°. The mozzarella at this point
should be in a rectangular shaped block. If
the water becomes too cool andthe mozzarella is not stretching easily, drain the
bowl and replace with new hot water. The
target curd temperature for a proper stretch
is 57° C/135° F.
MODERNIST FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA
8 Gently place the mozzarella into the half
hotel pan place the pan into the ice bath for
20-25 min.
9 Place the chilled mozzarella in the storage
bath.
10 Store for up to 1 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Citric acid 7.5 g 11/½ tsp 0.19
Water, cool 180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1% h
~600 g curds
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
Nonhomogenized whole milk 3.84 kg 1 gal +2/3 cup 100
(~3.25% fat)
Sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) 19.2 g 1 Tbsp + 34 tsp 0.5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt + 2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/2 tsp
Emulsifying salts, including sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP), are commonly used in the production
of processed cheeses to disperse proteins and lipids
and create a more homogeneous product. Adding
the emulsifying salt to the fresh curd allows it to
retain more moisture during draining, and its melting
was also improved while the browning was reduced.
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/2 tsp 0.06
For where to purchase cheese-making supplies, see Resources, page 3:377.
PROCEDURE
1 Follow steps 1-12 of the Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
4 Place the curds in the double boiler. 7
5 Let the curds sit undisturbed for 2-5 min.
2 Prepare a double boiler with a medium
saucepot and a medium bowl. Heat the
water to 93°C/200°F.
3 Toss the drained curds with the SHMP in a
large bowl.
326
6 Knead the mixture to form one large mass
of mozzarella.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Stretch the mozzarella 2-3 times. At each
stretch pull the cheese about 30 cm/1 ft,
then place the two ends together and pull
to stretch the cheese again.
8 Continue to follow steps 18-23 on page 325.
CHARCOAL FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Citric acid 7.5 g 1.5 tsp 0.2 Active 20-25 min /
Water, cool 230 g 1 cup 5.99 Inactive 1-1%h
~600 g curds
(six 100 g balls)
Nonhomogenized whole milk
(~3.25% fat)
3.84 kg 1 gallon +2/3 cup 100
Food-grade activated charcoal
Liquid animal rennet
19.2 g
1.18 g
1/3 cup +1 Tbsp
1/4 tsp
0.5
0.03
For forming the mozzarella
Water
Fine salt
3 kg
150 g
3 qt +1 cup 100
1/½ cup + 234 tsp 5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt +2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 1
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/2 tsp 0.06
PROCEDURE
1 Dissolve the citric acid in the water in a large
stainless-steel saucepot.
2 Whisk in the milk and charcoal gently.
3 Warm over medium-low heat to 32° C/
90° F, stirring occasionally.
4 Remove the pot from the heat.
5 Gently stir in the rennet with an up-and
down motion, about 10 s.
6 Cover the pot and leave undisturbed for
5 min.
7 Check the curd for clear separation. Ifthe
curd has not separated easily from the whey,
cover the pot and let it sit for an additional
5-10 min.
8 Cut the curd with a long knife or thin metal
spatula into 1.25-2.5 cm/1/2-1 in squares.
9 Return the pot to the stove and heat to
43°C/110°F while gently stirring the curds.
10 Remove the pot from the heat and continue
slowly stirring for 2-5 min.
11 Gently transferthe curds to a fine-mesh sieve
lined with cheesecloth.
12 Drain the curds for 20 min.
13 For forming the mozzarella, heat the water to
88°C/190° F in a medium saucepot. Add
the salt. If not serving the mozzarella right
away, prepare two water baths, one at 13°C/
55° F and one at 4.4°C/40°F.
14 Place half of the strained curds (or whatever
you feel comfortable with handling at one
time) in a large stainless-steel bowl.
15 Gently pour the hot salt water down the side
of the bowl (not directly on top of the curds)
until the curds are covered. Let sit undisturbed for 2 min.
16 Knead the mixture to form one large mass of
mozzarella within the water.
17 Stretch the mozzarella 2-3 times. At each
stretch pull the cheese about 60 cm/2 ft in
length, then place the two ends together and
pull to stretch the cheese again. If the water
becomes too cool and the mozzarella is not
stretching easily, drain the bowl and replace
with new hot water. The target curd temperature for a proper stretch is 57° C/135° F.
18 Once a nice sheen has developed from
stretching, form balls if desired, by taking a
stretched section of the curds and folding it
underneath itself to about 5 cm/2 in. in
diameter, then with your index finger and
thumb, pinch together one end and tear or
cut off.
19 Place the mozzarella in the 13° C/55° F water
bath for 5 min.
20 Transfer the mozzarella to the 4.4° C/40°F
bath for 10 min to keep their shapе.
21 For storing the mozzarella, stir together the
water, salt, and calcium lactate in an airtight
plastic container.
22 Place the chilled mozzarella in the storage
bath.
23 Store for up to 1 wk in refrigeration. Do not
freeze.
15 16
For more on how to use this mozzarella, see The Dark Side Neapolitan Pizza on page 3:56
17
CHEESE 327
9
CULTURED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole cow's milk
(~3.25% fat)
3.84 kg 1 gal +2/3 cup 100
Active 15-20 min/ ~600 g curds
Inactive 4%-5h
TA 61 thermophilic starter culture 0.26 g 1/8 tsp 0.007
(Danisco)
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 14 tsp 0.03
For forming the mozzarella
Water 3 kg 3 qt +1 cup 100
Fine salt 150 g 1/½ cup + 234 tsp 5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt + 2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/2 tsp 1
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/½ tsp 0.06
If you'd like to make mozzarella di bufala with
this method, simply replace the cow's milk with
buffalo's milk.
This mozzarella has a similar flavor to the Uncultured
Fior di Latte Mozzarella on page 324, but the texture can
differ. This mozzarella will be a bit firmer the first couple
of days after making it. There is a noticeable difference,
when baking the two.When using the direct acidification method, the acid causes the casein micelles to
attract to each other and aggregate together; that attraction means the cheese won't melt as well. With the
mozzarella made with culture, the acid is less intense,
which causes a better melt.
1
Forwhere to purchase cheese-making supplies, see Resources, page 3:377.
PROCEDURE
Warm the milk over medium-low heat to
38°C/100° F in a large stainless steel saucepot, stirring occasionally.
2 Sprinkle the culture over the milk.
3 Let it sit for 2 min before stirring.
4 Let the milk ripen for 1 h, stirring
occasionally.
5 Warm the milk back up to 38°C/100°F if
necessary.
6 Gently stir in the rennet with an up-anddown motion, about 10 s.
7 Let the milk sit undisturbed for 45 min.
8 Check the curd for clear separation and to
see if the curd has firmed enough to cut. If
the curd has not separated easily and/or is
not firm enough, cover the pot and let it sit
for an additional 10 min.
9 Cut the curds into 5 cm /2 in cubes.
10 Let the curds sit undisturbed for 10 min.
11 Stir gently while breaking up the curds into
1.25-2.5 cm /1/½-1 in pieces.
12 Let the curds settle to the bottom of the pot
over the course of 1 h. Agitate the curds
occasionally by gently stirring to keep them
from clumping together.
13 Check the pH (see page 292). The target pH
is 5.1-5.3.
14 Gradually heat the curds and whey to
32-38°C/90-100°F. Within 30 min to 1 h,
the target pH should be reached. The pH
will drop quickly once it reaches 5.6. Be
sure to check the pH every 5-10 min at this
point.
15 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
16 Drain the curds for 10 min.
17 Continue with steps 13-23 of the Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on
page 325.
Neapolitan pizza with fior di latte
mozzarella, yogurt/cultured cream
sauce, whole grain mustard,
sauerkraut, potatoes, bratwurst,
and fresh parsley
1
Goat's milk curds are a bit softer than those made
from cow's milk.
MODERNIST GOAT'S MILK MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole goat's milk
(~4.1% fat)
1.92 kg 2 qt +1/3 cup 100 Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 5-5% h
~300 g curds
Micellar casein 48 g 14 cup 2.5
TPF 5 thermophilic starter culture 0.13 g 1/16 tsp 0.007
(Bioprox)
Liquid animal rennet 0.59 g 18 tsp 0.03
For forming the mozzarella
Water 3 kg 3 qt + 1 cup 100
Fine salt 150 g 1/½ cup + 234 tsp 5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt + 2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 1
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/½ tsp 0.06
For where to purchase cheese-making supplies, see Resources, page 3:377.
PROCEDURE
Warm the milk over medium-low heat to
37°C/98° F in a large stainless steel saucepot, stirring occasionally.
2 While maintaining 37°C/98°F, gently
whisk in the casein.
3 Cover, and let the milk sit undisturbed for
20 min.
4 Sprinkle the culture over the milk.
5 Let it sit for 2 min before stirring.
6 Let the milk ripen for 1 h, stirring
occasionally.
7 Gently stir in the rennet with an up-anddown motion, about 10 s.
8 Cover, and let the milk sit undisturbed for
45 min.
وCheck the curd for clear separation and to
see if the curd has firmed enough to cut. If
the curd has not separated easily and/or is
not firm enough, cover the pot and let it sit
for an additional 10 min.
10 Cut the curds into 5 cm/2 in cubes.
11 Let the curds sit undisturbed for 10 min.
12 Stir gently while breaking up the curds into
1.25-2.5 cm / /½ inch-1 in pieces.
13 Let the curds settle to the bottom of the pot
over the course of 1 h. Agitate the curds
occasionally by gently stirring to keep them
from clumping together.
Goat's milk mozzarella is a little more delicate
when you form the balls. After stretching the
curds, quickly maneuver them into a ball shape
and place in cool water.
We included a recipe for goat's milk ricotta in
Modernist Cuisine and wanted to explore making
mozzarella with goat's milk for this book.We initially
thought that it would be simple to make, but it took a
lot of experimentation and help from cheese makers
to create this recipe. The goat flavor is pronounced
and distinct in this cheese; we highly recommend
that you try it.
14 Check the pH (see page 292). The target pH
is 5.1-5.3.
15 Gradually heat the curds and whey to
32-38°C/90-100° F. Within 30 min to lh,
the target pH should be reached. The pH
will drop quickly once it reaches 5.6. Be
sure to check the pH every 5-10 min at this
point.
16 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
17 Drain the curds for 10 min.
18 Continue with steps 13-23 of the Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on
page 325.
Neapolitan pizza with goat's milk mozzarella, king oyster mushrooms, balsamic vinegar, pistachios, and fig preserves
CHEESE 329
MODERNIST BUTTERMILK MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole cow's 3.84 kg 1 gal +2/3 cup 100
milk (~3.25% fat) Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 16%-22% h
~600 g curds
Nonhomogenized whole 192 g 3/4 cup 5
buttermilk (~4.1% fat)
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
For forming the mozzarella
Water 3 kg
Fine salt 150 g
3 qt +1 cup
1/½ cup + 23/4 tsp
100
5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg
Fine salt 20 g
2 qt +2/3 cup
| Tbsp + 1/2 tsp
100
Using buttermilk allows you to introduce a
culture to mozzarella in a simple fashion.
Much of the buttermilk at the grocery store is
low-fat. We recommend using full-fat buttermilk as a way to increase the fat in the cheese
and create a more full-flavored product. You
can add 17 g (1 Tbsp +1/½ tsp) heavy cream to
low-fat buttermilk to increase the fat percentage.
1
Calcium lactate 1.2 g 1/½ tsp 0.06
Forwhere to purchase cheese-making supplies, see Resources, page 3:377.
PROCEDURE
2
Combine the milk and buttermilk in a container, cover, and let sit in refrigeration for
12-18 h.
Warm the mixture over medium-low heat
to 38°C/100° F in a large stainless steel
saucepot, stirring occasionally.
3 Gently stir in the rennet with an up-anddown motion, about 10 s.
4 Cover, and let the milk sit undisturbed for
45 min.
5 Check the curd for clear separation and to
see if the curd has firmed enough to cut. If
the curd has not separated easily and/or is
not firm enough, cover the pot and let it sit
for an additional 10 min.
6 Cut the curds into 5 cm/2 in cubes.
7 Let the curds sit undisturbed for 10 min.
8 Stir gently while breaking up the curds into
1.25-2.5 cm / /2-1 in pieces.
9 Let the curds settle to the bottom of the pot
over the course of 1 h. Agitate the curds
occasionally by gently stirring to keep them
from clumping together.
10 Check the pH (see page 292). The target pH
is 5.1-5.3.
11 Gradually heat the curds and whey to
32-38°C/90-100°F. Within 30 min to 1 h,
the target pH should be reached. The pH
will drop quickly once it reaches 5.6. Be
sure to check the pH every 5-10 min at this
point.
12 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
13 Drain the curds for 10 min.
14 Continue with steps 13-22 of the Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on
page 325.
15 Store for up to 3 d in refrigeration.
Neapolitan pizza with Modernist buttermilk mozzarella, roasted leeks, broccolini, and fried brussels sprouts
330 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
BURRAТА TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING%
Fior di latte mozzarella curds* 600 g 2/½ cups 100
Heavy cream 200 g 3/4 cup + 2 Tbsp 33.33
Active 30-40 min/
Inactive 1-1%h
-800 g curds
For forming the mozzarella
Water 3 kg 3 qt+1 cup 100
Fine salt 150 g 1/2 cup + 23/4 tsp 5
For storing the mozzarella
Water 2 kg 2 qt +2/3 cup 100
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp + 1/½ tsp 1
Calcium lactate 1.2g 1/2 tsp 0.06
*Follow steps 1-12 ofthe Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324 ifyou want to make the
mozzarella curds.
PROCEDURE
1 Combine 200 g (34 cup + 11/½ Tbsp) curds
and heavy cream in a bowl.
2 Separate the filling into 4 portions and set
aside.
3 Cut butcher's twine into four 15 cm /6 in
lengths.
4 Follow steps 13-17 ofthe Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 325 with
the remaining curd.
5 Once a nice sheen has developed from
stretching, tear off about 100 g of cheese
and shape into a flat, round disc about
15-17.5 cm /6-7 in. in diameter.
5
6
7
6
Working quickly, place the disc into a round
container that is no more than 7.5 cm/3 in.
in diameter. Press the middle of the mozzarella disc into a bowl shape with some of
the disc hanging over the sides ofthe
container.
Add one portion ofthe filling to the center
of the disc. Gently pull up the sides of the
disc and pinch at the top to seal in the filling. Be sure to have a little cheese overhang
(roughly 2 cm/ 34 in) above the seal. Tie
one strand of twine around the seal.
8 Serve immediately. Alternatively, prepare a
water bath for storage by following steps
20-23 of the Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 325.
9 Repeat steps 5-8 to make the remaining
burrata.
Other filling options are clotted cream, mascarpone,
or ricotta (see page 338). In this case omit the heavy
cream and steps 2-4. Use all of the curd to make 4
burrata with 100 g of your desired filling per burrata.
7a
7b 7c
CHEESE
8
331
9
FRANKENCHEESES
Cheese comes in many shapes, textures, colors, and flavors. While many
cheeses melt exceedingly well and brown slightly as the pizza dough
bakes, others either do not melt at all or melt with noticeable fat separation. A good melt is achieved with the right combination of moisture
content, fat content, and acidity in the cheese. When a cheese lacks this
combination, its use for pizza is typically limited to applying after baking.
We wondered if we could manipulate these finishing cheeses using
modern techniques and equipment to come up with a protocol for
improving their melting qualities. Could we make certain cheeses melt
as well as mozzarella? We hoped to gain the flexibility of adding these
cheeses at any point during baking.
We looked at pairing up cheeses that don't normally melt well with
cheeses that do in hopes that we could obtain the flavor of the former
and the stretch and texture of the latter. We experimented with various
cheese blends, and affectionately dubbed them Frankencheeses. Our
first instinct was to start with the one cheese we know melts well on
pizza: low-moisture mozzarella (or pizza cheese). Next was to identify
the categories of finishing cheeses and a representative cheese from
each of these categories. We selected very hard cheeses, blue-veined
cheeses, washed-rind cheeses, and acid-coagulated cheeses: specifically
Parmesan, blue cheese, Brie, and fresh goat cheese.
Based on the success of the technique we use in our Modernist
Cheese Sauce recipe, which we updated from Modernist Cuisine at Home
(see page 255), we had the notion that emulsifiers or emulsifying salts
would help mesh the cheeses together. After several trials (and errors)
with different cheeses and emulsifiers, we found that some cheeses
blended better with 0.5% sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) while
others blended best with 2% mono- and diglyceride flakes (MDG) and
the addition of water.
Along with deciding on an emulsifier, we had to figure out the
optimal ratio of pizza cheese to the cheese we wanted to blend. Each
cheese-blend scenario was different; the cheeses with mild flavor, such
as Brie or Taleggio, required higher amounts cheese in combination with
the pizza cheese, while in the case of blue cheese, 20% was sufficient. In
the end, we found the flavor of the washed-rind cheeses got lost when
combined with the mozzerella. For some of the cheeses, we were able
to bake them successfully at different temperatures. We could bake the
goat cheese-based Frankencheese in both a 454°C/850° F gas-fired
pizza oven and a 315°C/600°F oven). The advantages are clear (and this
can be made with just a few ingredients) and offer a leap forward in the
ways we can manipulate various cheeses on pizza so that you can keep the
flavorwhile obtaining the ideal quality of the ever-popular pizza cheese.
332 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
FRESH GOAT CHEESE FRANKENCHEESE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Fresh goat cheese 200 g 1/½ cup +/3 cup 40
Pizza cheese, grated 300 g 3 cups 60
Active 6-10 min/
Inactive 3h
~500 g
Sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) 2.5 g 1/2 tsp 0.5
THERMOMIX METHOD
1 Place both cheeses in the Thermomix.
2 Sprinkle the sodium hexametaphosphate
on top.
3
4
5
Mix on 2.5 speed at 38-43°C/100-110°F
for 2-3 min.
Scrape the blender if needed.
Mix on 3.5-4.5 speed at 49-54° C/
120-130° F until smooth and homogenous,
4-6 min.
IMMERSION BLENDER METHOD
1 Place both cheeses in a 2-3 qt stainless steel
saucepot.
2 Sprinkle the sodium hexametaphosphate
on top.
3 Heat on low to 49° C/120°F. As the cheeses
melt, be sure to mix and stir with a silicone
spatula frequently, 4-5 min.
4 Blend the cheeses using an immersion
blender to help emulsify them. Blend until
smooth and homogenous, 2-4 min.
6 Pour into an 11.5-12.5 cm by 2.5-3.75 cm /
4/½-5 in by 1-11/½ in mold.
7 Cover directly with plastic wrap and place
in refrigeration to set completely, at least
3h.
8 Shred or slice the cheese before using.
9 Store for up to 10 d in refrigeration.
5 Pour into an 11.5-12.5 cm by 2.5-3.75 cm/
4/2-5 in by 1-11/½ in mold.
6 Cover directly with plastic wrap and place in
refrigeration to set completely, at least 3 h.
7 Shred or slice the cheese before using.
8 Store for up to 10 d in refrigeration.
BLUE CHEESE FRANKENCHEESE
The Thermomix is a device that combines several different appliances into one machine. It's a powerful
high-speed blender that also has precise temperature control (it can heat but not cool). You can weigh
directly into the cup of the machine and it comes
with various different attachments. It's a singleappliance dinner and there are lots of recipe books
and social media groups devoted to this device.
While this technique allows you to use these cheeses
in inventive ways, it's also worth noting that they work
exceptionally well with the typical flavor profiles that
you find on pizza.
TOTAL TIME YIELD INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Blue cheese 100 g 31/½ Tbsp 20
Pizza cheese, grated 400 g 4 cups 80
Sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) 2.5 g 1/½ tsp 0.5
Active 6-10 min/ ~500 g
Inactive 3 h
Follow the Thermomix or immersion blender instructions for Fresh Goat Cheese
Frankencheese above. Store for up to 2 wk in refrigeration.
The flavor will depend on the kind of blue cheese you
are using (some are stronger than others). For example, Roquefort has a very different flavor than Stilton.
PARMESAN FRANKENCHEESE TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Parmesan, grated 250 g 22/3 cups 50
Pizza cheese, grated 250 g 2½ cups 50
Active 6-10 min/
Inactive 3 h
~550 g
Water 50 g 14 cup 10
Mono- and diglyceride flakes (MDG) 10 g 1 Tbsp +2 tsp 2
Follow the Thermomix or immersion blender instructions for Fresh Goat Cheese
Frankencheese above. Replace the sodium hexametaphosphate with mono- and diglyceride flakes. Add the water with the mono- and diglyceride flakes. In step 5 of the Thermomix
method, mix on 4-5 speed at 65°C/150°F until smooth and homogenous, 4-6 min. In step 3
of the immersion blender method, heat on low to 63-65° C /145-150° F. Store for up to 2 wk in
refrigeration.
You can create flavorful variations ofthis cheese
by replacing 2.5% ofthe total water with strongly
flavored liquids such as fish sauce, Worcestershire
sauce, or ponzu.
Mono-and diglyceride flakes dissolve in oil at
60°C/140°F.
CHEESE 333
9
HIGHER-FAT FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
Citric acid 7.5 g 11/2 tsp 0.19
Water, cool 180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1%h
~600-700 g curds
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
Nonhomogenized whole milk 3.84 kg
(~3.25% fat)
1 gal +2/3 cup 100
Additional fat options
see table at right
PARAMETRIC RECIРЕ
ADDITIONAL FAT OPTIONS 425 g 11.07
*See table at right.
Follow steps 1-23 of the Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
Stir the additional fat in with the milk in step 2.
Ingredients Weight Volume
Sour cream 425 g 134 cups +11/½ Tbsp
Mascarpone* 425 g 1 cup
Crème fraîche 425 g 134 cups +1½ Tbsp
Heavy cream* 425 g 134 cups +11/2 Tbsp
Butter 425 g 13/4 cups +11/2 Tbsp
Ghee 425 g 134 cups +11/½ Tbsp
Olive oil 425 g 134 cups +2 Tbsp
Mozzarella di bufala is undeniably delicious; one of the reasons for this is that buffalo's milk
has almost twice as much fat as cow's milk. We wondered why we couldn't make a fior di latte
mozzarella that is closer to mozzarella di bufala, and it turns out you can. We increased the fat
content ofwhole milk by adding about 11% cream to the milk to reach 6.6% fat in the milk. This,
in turn, produceda mozzarella that has a higher overall fat content. Be sure to use heavy cream
without any additives or thickeners.
Perhaps some enterprising cheese makers will start producing this commercially. It's that good!
*These were some ofour favorite mozzarella variations in the book.
To assess how much fat is contained in these mozzarellas, we
determined how much fat is lost to the whey by centrifuging
it. Knowing the initial fat content ofthe milk and the weight of
the final cheese, we were able to calculate the fat content of
the mozzarella.
334 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Neapolitan pizza with olive oilinfused fior di latte mozzarella, and
fresh basil
HOW MUCH FAT ARE YOU ACTUALLY ADDING TO HIGHER FAT MOZZARELLA?
We loved the results we got when we increased the amount of fat in our
fior di latte mozzarella (see page 324). This got us to thinking about how
much actual fat is incorporated into the mozzarella. Knowing the initial
fat content of the milk and the weight of the final cheese, we were able
to calculate the fat content ofthe mozzarella by determining how much
fat was lost to the whey by centrifuging it.
After making a batch of mozzarella with 1.92 kg of whole milk, the
whey contained 10 g of fat (we centrifuged and weighed it). We calculated the theoretical total weight of fat in the milk (based on the nutrition facts from our dairy provider), subtracted 10 g, and obtained the
amount of fat retained in the mozzarella. To calculate the fat percentage,
we divided the amount of fat retained by the weight of the cheese. We
found that our homemade mozzarella contained 17.5% fat, which is very
similar to BelGioioso mozzarella (17.85% fat).
When using oil or other ingredients to incorporate fat and flavor
in mozzarella, we added 11.1% of the ingredients to 100% milk before
making our direct acidification mozzarella recipe on page 324. We then
collected the fat from the whey by centrifuging it and calculated the fat
percent in cheese in a similar fashion. We then baked pizzas with the
resulting mozzarella to see how it behaved during baking and how it
tasted to gather the recommendations in the table below.
This provided a richer flavor and creamier texture than mozzarella made with only whole milk.
This was one of our favorite results of incorporating additional fats.
The olive oil flavor is much more apparent before baking; it loses its signature flavor once it's
baked. It has a similar texture to the basic fior di latte mozzarella.
Product* % added to
100% milk
Overall % fat Notes
in the cheese
Heavy cream 11.07 36.5
Olive oil 11.07 21.9
Unsalted butter, 11.07
melted and
cooled
Ghee, melted 11.07
and cooled
32.72
Similar to olive oil mozzarella, the butter flavor is diminished after baking. Butter makes for an
even richer and softer mozzarella than fior di latte mozzarella made with cream. Because ofthis, the cheese loses its structure at a faster rate, resulting in a shorter shelf life.
Crème fraîche 11.07 23.01
Mascarpone 11.07 21.91
Sour cream 11.07 18.59
The overall flavor is very rich with a subtle ghee taste to the mozzarella. It becomes soft after 1d
and behaves like spreadable cheese. This makes for a shorter shelf life (2-3 d). This mozzarella
is very easy to melt and has the least amount of browning during baking when compared to the
other fats. Ghee mozzarella is very creamy in both raw and baked forms.
This addition made for a slightly tangier mozzarella that was also creamier than normal mozzarella.
This provided a richer flavor and creamier texture than mozzarella made with only whole milk.
This was also one of our favorite results of incorporating additional fats.
This addition did not add much creaminess in comparison to the control but brought in a tangier
flavor.
*The scaling is from the addition of 11.1% product to 100% milk for each ofthe cheeses.
**Since butter contains fat andwater, and the water will partially evaporate during melting, we couldn't accurately calculate the amount of fat in the resulting cheese.
HERB-INFUSED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole milk 3.84 kg 1 gal + 2/3 cup 100
(3.25% fat) Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 13-17% h
~600 g curds
Fresh basil, parsley, or dill, hand torn 384 g 914 cups 10
Citric acid 7.5 g 17/2 tsp 0.19
Water, cool 180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 14 tsp 0.03
PROCEDURE
1 Steep the milk with the herbs overnight
under refrigeration, 12–16 h.
2 Strain the milk.
3 Follow steps 1-22 of the Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
CHEESE
4 Store for up to 2-3 d in refrigeration.
335
9
PAPRIKA-INFUSED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole milk
(~3.25% fat)
3.84 kg 1 gal + 2/3 cup 100
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1½ h
~600 g curds
Spanish paprika 38.4 1/3 cup 1
Citric acid 7.5 g 1/2 tsp 0.19
Water, cool 180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
PROCEDURE
1 Whisk together the milk and paprika. 2 Follow steps 1-23 of the Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
SAFFRON-INFUSED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Nonhomogenized whole milk 3.84 kg 1 gal +2/3 cup 100
(~3.25% fat)
Saffron 1g 1 Tbsp + 2 tsp 0.03
Citric acid 7.5 g 11/½ tsp 0.19
Water, cool 180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
Liquid animal rennet 1.18 g 14 tsp 0.03
TOTAL TIME YIELD
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1% h
~600 g curds
PROCEDURE
1 Bring 100 g (13 cup +2 Tbsp) of the milk to a
simmer with the saffron.
2 Cool, strain, and add to the remaining milk. 3 Follow steps 1-23 of the Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
FLAVORED OIL-INFUSED FIOR DI LATTE
MOZZARELLA
INGREDIENTS
Nonhomogenized whole milk
(~3.25% fat)
Flavored oil*
Citric acid
Water, cool
Liquid animal rennet
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
3.84 kg 1 gal +2/3 cup 100
Active 20-25 min/
Inactive 1-1%h
~600 g curds
384 g 134 cups 10
7.5 g 11/½ tsp 0.19
180 g 3/4 cup 4.69
1.18 g 1/4 tsp 0.03
*Suggestions include extra-virgin olive oil, lemon or citrus oils, garlic confit oil (see page 366), or herb-infused oils.
PROCEDURE
1 Whisk together the milk and flavored oil. 2 Follow steps 1-23 of the Uncultured Fior di
Latte Mozzarella recipe on page 324.
VACUUM-INFUSED FIOR DI LATTE MOZZARELLA TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Fior di latte mozzarella, cut or torn
see page 324
100 g 13 cup +11/2 Tbsp 100
Active 5 min ~100 g
Wine or ponzu 30 g 2 Tbsp 30
PROCEDURE
1 Combine in a small, deep bowl.
2 Place the bowl in a chamber vacuum
machine and pull the vacuum to 100%,
making sure the liquid does not flow over
the bowl.
3 Strain off any excess liquid.
4 This mozzarella is best used the day it is
made.
You need to use very strong wine in order for the
flavor to come through. You can try making a spicy
version of this mozzarella by diluting hot sauce,
such as tabasco, sriracha, gochujang, or chipotle in
adobo sauce, to taste in 30 g (2 Tbsp) water in place
ofthe wine.
CHEESE 337
9
Ricotta cheese was developed as a
way to use the leftoverwhey that's a
by-product of making other cheeses.
RICOTTA
INGREDIENTS
Whole milk
Citric acid
Fine salt
RICOTTA
Ricotta is a soft, unripened cheese that is commonly
used on many kinds of pizzas. It was created as a
way to make use of whey from other cheese making
processes, such as mozzarella. In that case, almost all
ofthe fat would go into making the mozzarella cheese
curd, but you would still have a lot of protein in the
whey. Coagulating that became a way to reuse the
whey (in combination with milk). Many ricotta recipes use an acid such as lemon juice, vinegar, or buttermilk for coagulation. You can also make ricotta solely
from whole milk, which provides a much creamier
result because the fat is contained in the cheese.
In many ways, ricotta is the culmination ofthe
beginning stages of cheese making (see page 290).
You basically take the milk to the point of making
curd, drain it, and call it a day; it's that simple. The
milk or milk-whey blend is acidified directly using a
food-grade acid (such as citric acid), a starter culture
(although this is not very common because it takes
longer to make), or acid whey powder (~25% is
added). The mixture is brought to a pH between 5.9
WEIGHТ
2 kg
and 6, and it is then heated to 80°C/ 176°F. Other
forms of acid can be added, such as vinegar, lemon
juice, or even buttermilk. Even though the first
couple steps are the same as making mozzarella, the
result is totally different. The ricotta has a grainy texture and doesn't melt (although the high-fat ricotta
will melt, in a fashion).
The USDA specifies three types of ricotta.
Ricotta is made from whey, skim milk, or a combination of whey and skim milk. It has a moisture content of~82.5% and a fat content of~1%. Part-skim
ricotta is made from reduce-fat milk and must have
between 6% and 11% milk fat and 80% moisture
content. Whole-skim ricotta is made from whole
milk and should have a fat percentage above 11%.
Ricotta is applied to pizza either before or after
baking, depending on the desired effect. It is soft
enough to act as a sauce, depending on how freshly
made it is. To us, there are few things as delicious
as the taste of a smooth, just-made, and still slightly
warm ricotta. You can also buy it, of course.
TOTAL TIME VOLUMЕ YIELD SCALING %
2 qt +2/3 cup
3/4 tsp
100 ☑
0.2
as needed
4g Active 7-10 min/
Inactive 45 min-1 h
~400 g
PROCEDURE
1 Warm the milk over medium heat to 93°C/
200° F in a medium stainless steel saucepot,
stirring occasionally.
2 Remove the pot from the heat and gently
whisk in the citric acid.
3 Let it stand undisturbed for 10 min.
2
4 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
5 Drain the curds for 25-30 min.
6 Season with salt to taste. Start with 1% of the
final weight of the ricotta and then adjust as
needed.
7
7
Use immediately or store in an airtight container for up to 3 d in refrigeration.
You can replace the citric acid with 45 g (3 Tbsp)
lemon juice or distilled white vinegar if you don't
have citric acid on hand. The lemon juice will lend its
flavor to the ricotta while the vinegar is much more
neutral.
338 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
This ricotta is smooth, creamy, and perfect as a sauce
on pizza or simply garnished with olive oil, herbs,
salt, and pepper and enjoyed on its own.
RICOTTA WITH ADDED FAT TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Whole milk (~3.5% fat) 2 kg 2 qt +2/3 cup 100
Mascarpone, crème fraîche, or
heavy cream
225 g 1 cup 11.25
Active 7-10 min/
Inactive 45 min
~500 g curds
Citric acid
Fine salt
2g
as needed
1/4+1/8 tsp 0.1 We recommend starting with 1% added salt and
then adjusting the seasoning to taste.
PROCEDURE
1 Warm the milk and additional dairy gradually in a medium saucepot over medium
heat to 93°C/200°F, stirringoccasionally.
GOAT'S MILK RICOTТA
2 Continue with steps 2-7 of the Ricotta
recipe on the previous page.
TOTAL TIME
INGREDIENTS WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING %
Whole goat's milk (~4.1% fat) 2 kg 2 qt +2/3 cup 100 Active 7-10 min /
YIELD
~400 g curds
Citric acid
Fine salt
2g 14 tsp +1/8 tsp 0.1 Inactive 45 min
as needed
Follow steps 1-7 of the Ricotta recipe on the previous page.
We recommend starting with 1% added salt and then adjusting the seasoning to taste.
BUTTERMILK RICOTTA
INGREDIENTS
Buttermilk (~4.1% fat)
Whole milk
Fine salt
The texture of this cheese is a little drier than ricotta
made with cow's milk.
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHТ VOLUME SCALING %
1 kg 1 qt +13 cup 100
1 kg 1 qt+1/3 cup 100 Active 7-10 min/
Inactive 45 min-1 h
~300 g
as needed
1
PROCEDURE
2
Warm the milk and buttermilk over medium
heat to 85°C/185° F in a medium stainless
steel saucepot, stirringoccasionally. Hold at that temperature for 3-5 min. You
will see the mixture starting to separate.
3 Remove the pot from the heat. Let it stand
undisturbed for 10 min.
4 Gently transfer the curds to a fine-mesh
sieve lined with cheesecloth.
5 Drain the curds for 25-30 min.
New York pizza with smoked mozzarella, ricotta, spicy Italian sausage, and sautéed Swiss chard
CHEESE
The buttermilk ricotta is drier and slightly more
crumbly than our whole-milk ricotta recipe.
6
7
Season with salt to taste. Start with 1% of the
final weight of the ricotta and then adjust as
needed.
Use immediately or store in an airtight container for up to 3 d in refrigeration.
339
CHAPTER 10
TOPPINGS
THE SCIENCE OF PIZZA TOPPINGS 344
TOPPING PAYLOAD 346
TOPPING APPLICATION 349
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 356
PRECOOKING TECHNIQUES 360
MEATS 375
FINISHING YOUR PIZZA 382
TOPPINGS
When we talk about toppings, we mean everything
that goes on pizza dough that isn't sauce or cheese.
There are so many possible toppings to put on
pizza, just choosing them can be daunting. Indeed,
we suspect that in order to avoid the choice part
altogether, some pizza makers pretty muchjust pile everything on and throw the pizza in the oven.
There is a better way.
Our first rule for toppings boils down to two
words: even distribution. It infuriates us to see a
lopsided pizza, with more toppings on one side
than the other. It's like getting a glazed doughnut
that has sprinkles on only one side. No one wants
that. And since pizza is often meant to be shared,
it means someone's going to end up with a
sad-looking slice.
Order of assembly is also important. Do all
toppings have to go on the pizza before baking?
Most do, but some toppings do best when added
halfway through or even after baking. We'll share
tips on how to apply toppings in each of these stages,
but the overarching goal is to get thinking about the
intended texture of your toppings and the eating
experience you want your pizza to provide.
Biteability is key. Even though it's a made-up
word, we're pretty sure you know what we mean: the
ability to bite cleanly into a slice without dragging
off all the toppings. Important, right? Certain toppings, such as thinly sliced prosciutto, are low on the
biteability scale; you'll most likely drag offa whole
slice with your first bite. But there are ways to solve
biteability problems, and you'll find them here.
Payload is another big question in the topping
department (as is the moisture content of the
topping; this will determine if you need to precook
the ingredient). How much can you put on a pizza
without going overboard, creating a soggy pizza
whose toppings slide off because they can't bind
properly with the sauce and cheese? We'll walk you
through how much is enough, so you'll know when
to say when. Some people just eyeball it, but until
you've made a lot of pizzas, nothing beats a scale
for precision-and don't worry, we've got a table
on page 348 with maximum payloads for all of our
master pizza styles and sizes.
The majority of this chapter gives you the
know-how to prepare pizza toppings. We'll give
you an overview of our favorite basic cooking
methods for vegetables and fruits since many of
these ingredients need to be prepared in some way
before putting them on top of pizza. These methods aren't meant to teach you how to cook but to
give you simple guidelines. Because these methods
will work for many types of vegetables and fruits
(as well as meats), you'll need to tailor the methods
for the different types of toppings. Our section on
meat toppings focuses on preparing the common
cured meats and fresh sausages that you find on
pizza. We'll also give you information on finishing
oils, which can add a nuanced flavor to your pizza.
You'll find our favorite topping combinations in our
Flavor Themes chapter on page 3:173.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
Recommended topping weights for each pizza style (see page 348)
Our toppings database findings (see page 354)
Frico cheese crisps as a topping (see page 372)
Why does pepperoni curl? (see page 379)
This thin-crust pizza in the photo on the
previous page topped with layered portobello
mushrooms and garnished with chives and
chervil after baking.
343
10
No one would want a doughnut that's topped
on only one side. Pizza is no different: toppings
should be applied evenly and symmetrically.
THE SCIENCE OF PIZZA TOPPINGS
All pizza toppings share some factors that are critical
for which ingredients you choose to use as a topping,
how much you use, and when you apply them. The
ways that different toppings react to baking affect
the whole eating experience, and we've noticed that
careful attention to toppings is often the difference
that makes one pizzeria better than others. Certainly
dough, sauce, and cheese matter, but toppings can
make or break an otherwise great pizza.
The first of these critical factors, and the most
constraining, is heat. A topping that is applied to
the pizza before baking, which is typical for most
styles, has to be able to survive its time in the oven.
Depending on the pizza style, that oven can be
extremely hot.
You want the toppings to cook properly but not
burn. This is one of many reasons that you can't
make a steak pizza by just throwing a piece of steak
on top of a pizza-not only will it not cook properly
in the time that it takes to bake the pizza, it won't
be easy to eat. If you put raw sausage on a thin-crust
pizza and iť's exposed to the heat, it will probably
cook through and brown, but if it's buried under a
layer of sauce and cheese, as in the case of deep-dish
pizza, it'll steam and won't be as tasty.
Similar consideration needs to be taken for delicate items, like basil, which can burn easily in a hot
oven. Either you'll have to put the basil under the
cheese if you apply it before baking, or you'll need to
add it to the pizza near the end of baking. Pizzaioli
have recently been applying more toppings after
baking, especially ones that will be adversely affected
by the baking process. You see this with all styles of
pizza, including trendy styles like al taglio where the
crust is often prebaked without any toppings at all
(see page 3:130).
The next factor to consider is how the toppings
"eat" with the rest of the pizza. Toppings that are
too tough to bite through or are tough enough that
they're a substantially different texture from the
crust or other parts of the pizza are going to be a
problem. Note that there is a difference between
"eatability" (the overall eating experience) and
"biteability" (how you bite through the topping).
For example,you can technically bite through a
soupy pizza but the overall eatability isn't great. The
amount of toppings and how messy they are will also
impact eatability. We found that the pizza makers in
Argentina used an overwhelming amount of cheese
on pizzas, which is why it is common to eat the slice
with a knife and fork. They also put whole, unpitted
olives on their pizzas as a decorative topping. Since
the olives were unsliced, they would roll off. And
if you were unlucky enough to get one, you might
crack a tooth.
Moisture content is another issue. Toppings
that release a lot of moisture when they heat up will
lead to a soggy pizza. Certain items can release a
significant amount of fat, which can puddle on the
pizza. Some people don't like this; it's common to
see people dabbing the fat off the top of the pizza
with a napkin. If this is a problem for you or your
customers, you can render items like bacon or
high-fat sausage before it goes on the pizza. You
should never do this with cupping pepperoni, however, since the little grease chalices are a big part of
the eating experience. In general, it's hard for raw
toppings to properly cook on a pizza and they often
release a significant amount of water, which is why
toppings are often precooked.
We provide topping suggestions in both the
Iconic Recipes chapter on page 3:3 and the Flavor
Themes chapter on page 3:173. If you are creating
your own pizza rather than following the recipes
(which we think is fantastic), use these guidelines
when you are applying toppings that aren't covered
in this book. You can also look for other similar
toppings in the book and treat your toppings in the
same fashion.
We recommend precooking any of the fresh sausages that you would
use on pizza (see page 375) in order to get the benefits of browning.
Meats that can be eaten outright, like smoked salmon or prosciutto,
are different and don't need this additional cooking step.
COMMON TOPPING PROBLEMS
The best way to fix a problem is to avoid it in the first place.This list of common topping problems are all ones that are difficult to fix once your topped
pizza goes into the oven, so considerthese ahead of time, or learn from your mistakes and try again!
Problem Solution
There is topping drag. If toppings cover a surface area larger than a mouthful, the result is often topping drag. Cut or hand-tear these ingredients
into smaller, bite-sized pieces before baking.
The toppings are tough. Kale, meats with connective tissue (such as pork shoulder), and other tough ingredients should be partially or fully cooked
before they're placed on a pizza and cut to appropriate sizes. If you have applied a topping and it's still tough after baking,
you can't do much about it but take it off.
The toppings are burnt. Apply the topping halfway or three-quarters of the way through baking rather than at the beginning. You can also make
sure the topping is surrounded by moist ingredients to insulate and protect it from high heat exposure. Keep in mind that
there are degrees of burnt. If it's just slightly charred, it can add to the overall positive experience of eating pizza. If it's black
in a bunch of areas or if it smells burnt, it might not be pleasant to eat. You might be able to manually pick burnt bits out
without disrupting the cohesiveness of the merged toppings. If not, remake the pizza.
The pizza has excessive
toppings.
The toppings fall off.
Weigh the amount of toppings based on our suggestions. Excess toppings typically leach a lot of water. The problem is particularly pronounced with vegetable-heavy pizzas or when using very moist toppings. The water has trouble evaporating by
the time the crust is baked. Don't overload the pizza; alternatively, precook some or all of the ingredients.
Toppings are held together by the melted cheese, but if you have a loose layer of too-wet toppings, the whole thing will
slide off when you take a bite. Also, make sure your toppings aren't too big, as large toppings tend to fall off. In this case,
you can suggest that the slice be eaten folded orwith a fork and knife.
Topping drag Tough toppings Burnt toppings
Excessive toppings
TOPPINGS
Toppings fall off
345
10
TOPPING PAYLOAD
"Payload" is a term used in aviation and aerospace
to describe the amount of "stuff” a vehicle can carry
given the amount of fuel it has. In other words,
payload is its capacity to carry the weight without
compromising flight functions. We think the term
also applies to pizza. How much stuff can I put on
before all the toppings spill off or the slice buckles
under its own weight?
Neapolitan-style pizza can't handle a lot of
toppings. The dough is soft and the baking time is
short, which prevents a firm crust from forming.
Even a simple marinara pizza will sag at the tip. In
fact, according to the AVPN (see page 3:43), tip sag
is a positive quality attribute.While some tip sag is
acceptable, that doesn't mean you can pile loads of
toppings on a Neapolitan-style pizza. That approach
simply doesn't work with this style.
Other pizzas, though, can hold a significant
amount of toppings. But just because you can
doesn't mean you should. If you're eating pizza with
your hands, the toppings are likely to slide off if
you've piled on too many. This can happen even if
you fold the slice.
Pan-baked pizzas are significantly thicker and
theoretically could handle a pile of toppings, especially if you're eating them with a fork and knife. But
more toppings do not always translate to a better
eating experience. You want to get the balance right.
Too much weight on even the thickest of pizzas
will hinder its expansion in the oven and produce a
denser crumb than desirable.
We learned during Modernist Bread that bread
can withstand up to 30% of dry weight in it and
still expand to a good volume in the oven. This
also applies to pizza, although pizza toppings aren't
typically dry weight. Most, if not all, toppings
contain some moisture, and this moisture can
produce a very undesirable gum line (see page
1:370) between the dough and the sauce, cheese,
and other toppings.
Undertopped Overtopped Topping slides off
Poor distribution Uneven baking
These photos, taken during our travels to pizzerias allover the globe, illustrate what can happen when you don't pay enough
attention to how much and where you place the toppings on your pizza.
346 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Wet toppings
Properly topped
Undertopped
Overtopped
347
10
RECOMMENDED TOPPING WEIGHTS
Here are our recommendations for the optimal to maximum topping
payload range for each style of pizza. These are admittedly subjective,
and some styles of pizza, like the cheese-laden ones we sampled in
Buenos Aires, far exceed these amounts. For practical purposes, this
includes the sauce and cheese, so the numbers here are for the total
payload. (The amount of cheese can vary from pizza to pizza, of course,
but we've used the iconic assembly recipe amounts in the chapter that
begins on page 3:3.) The maximum figure indicates the point just before
quality aspects begin to suffer. When considering the amount of topping
to put on, keep in mind both the volume and the flavor intensity of the
ingredient. If you toppeda small thin-crust pizza with 135 g of arugula
after baking, it would engulf the pizza, and 135 g of anchovies would
overwhelm the other flavors on the pizza. But adding 135 g of burrata
would be reasonable in terms of both volume and flavor.
1 2 3
Style of pizza Pizza size Sauce Cheese
4 5 6
before baking after baking
Toppings added Toppings added Total payload (sauce Total payload (sauce
+ cheese + toppings + cheese + toppings
added before
baking) (1+2+3)
added before and
after baking) (4+5)
Thin-Crust Pizza
see page 3:19
40 cm/16 in 95 g 150 g 135-165 g 135-150 g 380-410 g 515-560 g
50 cm/20 in 170 g 270 g 0-300g 250-275 g 690-740 g 940 g-1.01 kg
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
see page 3:25
23 cm/9 in 100 g 175 g 165- 55-210 g 95-135 135 g 440-485 g 535-620 g
40 cm/16 in 160 g 340 g 300-380 g 170-250 g 800-880 g 970 g-1.1-1.13 kg
Neapolitan Pizza*
see page 3:47
30 cm/12 in 20 g 100 g 125--150 g 180-210 g 345-370 g 525-580g
New York Pizza
see page 3:71
35 cm/14 in 60 g 195 g 130-0-300 g 175-225 g 485-655 g 660-880 g
40 cm/16 in 240 g 290 g 195- 05-450 g 260-335 g 725-980 g 985 g-1.31 kg
45 cm/18 in 320 g 390 g
260-600 g 350-450 g 970 g-1.31 kg 1.32-1.76 kg
50 cm/20 in 400 g 485 g 325- g 435-560 g 1.21-1.63 kg 1.64-2.19 kg
55 cm/22 in 440 g 535 g 355- 55-825 g 480-615 g 1.33-1.8 kg 1.81-2.41 kg
60 cm/24 in 480 g 585 g 390-900 g 525-675 g 1.45-1.96 kg 1.97-2.63 kg
Artisan Pizza 35 cm/14 in 145 g 180 g 170-0-300 g 110-320 g 495-625 g 605-945 g
see page 3:77 40 cm/16 in 215 g 270 g 255-450 g 165-480 g 740-935 g 605 g-1.41 kg
45 cm/18 in 290 g 360 g 340-600 g 220-640 g 6690 g-1.25 kg 1.21-1.89 kg
50 cm/20 in 360 g 450 g 42525-750 g 275-800 g 1.23-1.56 kg 1.5-2.36 kg
55 cm/22 in 400 g 495 g 465-825 g 300-880 g 1.36-1.72 kg 1.66-2.66 kg
60 cm/24 in 435 g 540 g 510- 10-900 g 330-960 g 1.48-1.87 kg 1.81-2.83 kg
New York Square Pizza
see page 3:133
46 cm by 33 cm/ 225 g 425 g 800-900 g 700-800 g 1.45-1.55 kg 2.15-2.35 kg
18 in by 13 in
Al Taglio Pizza
see page 3:141
60 cm by 20 cm/ 200 g
24 in by 8 in
300 g 550-600 g 350-57575 g 1.05-1.1 kg 1.4-1.67 kg
60 cm by 40 cm/ 400 g
24 in by 16 in
600 g 1.1-1.2 kg 700 g-1.15 kg 2.1-2.2 kg 2.8-3.35 g
Detroit-Style Pizza
see page 3:109
25 cm by 20 cm/ 75 g
10 in by 8 in
170 g 185-210 g 175-200 g 430-455 g 605-655 g
35 cm by 25 cm/ 150 g
14 in by 10 in
340 g 375-425 g 350-400 g 865-915 g 1.21-1.31 kg
*These amounts arefor margherita pizzas. For marinara pizzas, reduce the amounts by 40 g.
348 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
TOPPING APPLICATION
If you've watched pizza being made, it might seem
like applying toppings is a no-brainer. How hard can
it be? A little bit of sprinkling, a little bit of laying or
layering, and that's the end of that. Right? The pros
certainly make it look easy, but they've had a lot of
practice not only making pizzas but making them
efficiently and quickly.
Toppings need to be distributed evenly and
symmetrically over the surface of the pizza. Envision
each slice (triangles or quarters for round pizzas
and quarters for rectangular pizzas) and try to apply
roughly the same amount of toppings on each one.
The toppings should not exceed the payload (the
weight ofthe toppings the pizza can support). Less
is often more when it comes to toppings. If you
apply them evenly, you can probably get away with
applying less. If you are sloppy with the topping
application, you'll tend to apply more.
A peel can be used to test this. Ifyou assemble
your pizza on a work surface and then struggle to
slide a peel under it before moving it to the oven,
there's a good chance you've added too many
toppings. (Some people choose to assemble their
pizza on the peel, which could conceivably mitigate
this problem, but there are pros and cons to each
approach; see page 204.)
When you cut the baked pizza into slices, the
toppings should stay in place, anchored down by
sauce (and possibly cheese). The toppings provide
flavors and textures that will harmonize or contrast
with the other components. When you are preparing
your toppings, you need to keep in mind how the
seasoning will meld with the other flavors on the
pizza. For example, we recommend seasoning your
vegetables when roasting or sautéing them, but the
level of seasoning may need to vary depending on
the other components on the pizza. For example,
finishing a pizza with shaved Parmesan curls could
push a well-seasoned pizza into the realm of being
overly salty.
Visually divide pizzas into slices and top them
accordingly. In this case, the al taglio pizza is
topped after baking but you should top pizzas
symmetrically whether you are topping them
before or after baking.
TOPPINGS 349
10
If you're a bread baker, it is worth
noting that the way you prepare toppings isn't all that different from how
you would prepare some inclusions
for bread. Some toppings will need to
be cooked before being added to а
pizza, just like some inclusions. Others
can be chopped and added without
additional prep. The main difference
is obvious: pizza toppings go on top
of the dough and are baked in direct
contact with external heat, while bread
inclusions are baked inside the dough
and are thus protected from direct
heat. Unprotected, toppings can experience melting, evaporation, browning,
and fat rendering, while inclusions
won't necessarily experience all those
changes, or at least not as dramatically.
Including raw sausage in your topping station
can create a food safety issue. We recommend
cooking your sausage ahead of time (see page
375), but if you prefer using uncooked sausage
on your pizzas, take care in how you store it to
avoid cross-contamination.
WHEN TO APPLY TOPPINGS
At the most basic level, the goal is for the toppings
to meld together during baking. They'll merge with
the other components, such as sauce and cheese, and
form a cohesive and well-balanced pizza. In most
cases, the simplest way to achieve this is to distribute
the toppings evenly across the top of the unbaked
pizza dough along with the other components. But
we encourage you to consider how the topping
placement will affect how the pizza bakes. What
impact will it have if the toppings go under the
cheese? Under the sauce? In between them? How
will those things affect the eating experience?
One way to approach these questions is to think
about what you want out of each topping. Take spinach, for example. Adding a pile of uncooked spinach
to a pizza before it bakes is probably unwise. First,
there's the volume problem; raw spinach cooks down
to a fraction of its size. It also releases a bunch of
water, which can make for soggy pizza. Then there's
the fact that a pile of spinach leaves can prevent whatever is under them from melting or cooking (and may
burn in the process). So it may be smarter to apply
sautéed spinach under the cheese at the beginning
of baking so it can meld with the cheese and sauce,
or to apply it as a salad-like topping after the pizza
comes out of the oven. Some of this comes down to
personal preference as well, since you are the one who
determines how you want your pizza to be served.
The time it takes for a pizza to bake is another
factor to consider. Neapolitan pizzas bake quickly.
Whatever you're putting on the pizza needs to meld
with the sauce and cheese during that short time in
the oven, so we generally recommend precooked
toppings or toppings that cook quickly, like sliced
garlic. Additionally, if you add something that has
been significantly browned or charred, it will likely
burn and be unpleasant to eat due to the high heat at
which Neapolitan pizzas are baked. But you can alter
the assembly of the pizza and, for example, intersperse caramelized onions with the sauce, whether
it's Classic Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 225) or something like cream or mascarpone,
to protect the onions from the intense heat.
Likewise, it's not only acceptable but encouraged to apply certain toppings to pizza after
baking. Temperature-sensitive ingredients such
as salad greens are quite obviously going to wilt if
they're baked, but others may not be so obvious.
For instance, some cured meats are best added at
the end of a bake rather than the start. If you bake a
high-end Serrano ham or duck prosciutto on your
pizza, you'll wind up with an unidentifiable leathery,
salty crisp. Most of the flavors and textures we enjoy
from cured meats such as these are at their peak at
room temperature or slightly warm. Placing them on
a hot pizza after baking gives them an ideal texture
because they'll be quickly heated through and tender. Pepperoni, on the other hand, tastes best after
a little time in the oven. The edges get crisp and the
fat renders and pools onto the cheese. It's sometimes
better to cut the baked pizza before placing toppings
such as mortadella slices on, especially if they'll
adversely affect the pizza's presentation.
A large pile of raw spinach added before
baking will cook down to a soggy pile in the
heat of the oven, preventing anything underneath from fully cooking. We suggest sautéing
spinach and other hearty greens before adding
so that the water has been released and you
have better gauge on the amount.
350 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Applying Toppings Before Baking
Before applying toppings, decide what flavor and
textural role your particular topping(s) will play.
Some will combine with the sauce and cheese, while
others may crisp or brown. Consider that previously
cooked toppings will cook further when exposed
to the direct blast of heat in the oven. (This will
occur only on the parts of the cooked topping that
aren't surrounded by sauce, cheese, or other moist
toppings that slow down browning.) We tend to
like dark brown, crispy, slightly charred bits on our
pizzas, but this is a matter of personal preference
that you can decide for yourself.
Most pizza toppings are applied before baking so
that the flavors can blend together and so that the
toppings will meld with the sauce and cheese. This
improves the eating experience because the toppings
won't fall off when you bite into the slice. Some
toppings, like sliced mushrooms, bell peppers, olives,
or pepperoni, can be scattered raw on the pizza
(usually in between the sauce and cheese layers) and
they'llbake beautifully into a delicious pizza. Other
toppings, like quince, winter squash, or tough cuts of
meat, require advanced preparation before putting
them on pizza. You can also use a combination of
raw and precooked variations of the same ingredient
(like sliced raw onions and caramelized onions or
potato puree and fried shoestring potatoes) to provide flavor and textural contrasts in your pizza.
When possible, room-temperature toppings are
preferable to cold. Cold toppings can cool down the
dough, which can cool down the oven and prolong
baking time. Some toppings, such as uncooked
meats, must remain refrigerated, and you may need
to adjust the baking times to accommodate the cold
toppings. And although most cured meats are okay
to sit out at room temperature for up to 2 hours,
some, like thinly sliced prosciutto, are easier to
separate when they're cold.
As you begin applying toppings, it helps to
visually divide the pizza into evenly sized grids,
whether they are triangles, rectangle, or squares.
Your goal is to make those portions look more or less
the same. Try to keep the same toppings similar in
size so they'll bake and cook at about the same rate.
It is crucial to apply the toppings more generously at
the outer perimeter. The toppings will move toward
the center during baking because the center is the
weakest point of the pizza. The concentration of
toppings in the middle, called center loading, must
be avoided.
THE UBIQUITOUS SHAKERS THAT LET YOU CUSTOMIZE YOUR SLICE
Many pizzerias across the United States offer shakers of crushed red
pepper, Parmesan, and dried oregano. They are so common, we got to
wondering about this widespread practice. We didn't see this in Italy
during our many visits.
Take the crushed red pepper, for example. Trying to shake out a few
flakes can be an exercise in frustration. It turns out there's a reason for
this. Most of those shakers have holes that are just big enough for the
seeds and some flakes to come out. This prevents customers from accidentally dumping on too much, which could lead to (gasp!) not eating
the slice or trying to pick offthe spicy bits. Thankfully there's a more
generous and better-designed shaker. The one shown at right has ventlike openings. It still controls the amount of flakes that come out, but it's
more generous than the classic shaker.
When it comes to the Parmesan shakers, we're sorry to inform you that
the cheese is not, and has never been, Parmigiano-Reggiano. Rather, it's
Parmesan, a very different cheese. Parmigiano-Reggiano can be costly. It
has a DOP protection (see page 213),which means it's made under strict
regulation. Cheeses that aren't made to these specifications must be called
something else, even if they're made in generally the same style.
In the United States, we refer colloquially to Parmigiano-Reggiano
as Parmesan as well, which is why there might be some confusion. The
Parmesan in the shakers is milled, not grated, which makes it closer to a
powder and easy to shake out ofthe jar (a grated shape might get stuck or
clogged in the shaker). Some pizzaioli add Parmesan to their pizza before
baking, and with good reason. Parmesan (and Parmigiano-Reggiano)
contains a high amount of naturally occurring MSG, which provides
a lot of flavor without having to rely completely on salt.Whether you
choose to add it after baking is a matter of personal preference.
Most of the dried oregano in pizzeria shakers is Greek oregano, also
known as true oregano or Italian oregano. If you offer dried oregano in
shakers in your establishment, be mindful of how old the dried herb is
since the flavor can deteriorate over time.
Pizza makers will often apply dried oregano to their pizzas either before or after
baking since the flavor complements the sauce and cheese so well. Some pizzaioli prefer a type of dried oregano that comes from the Calabria region in Italy; it
comes in a dried bunch (instead of loose leaves), and it adds to the "show" to tap
the dried bunch of oregano on a freshly baked pizza. Oregano is very aromatic,
but even more so if it's slightly toasted, so you can really amplify the aroma if you
add it before you bake the pizza rather than after.
TOPPINGS 351
10
Toppings like cheese, pepperoni, or thinly
sliced onions can be applied easily before
baking. Toppings like pistachios can be applied
during baking while items like arugula, which
are delicate, should be added to the pizza after
baking.
Applying Toppings Halfway
Through Baking
Some toppings, such as shellfish, chicken breast, or
foie gras, might overcook, melt, or burn if they spend
the entire baking time in the oven. While adding
toppings halfway through baking is not as common
as adding toppings before or after baking, it is a
good option for certain items that benefit from some
time in the oven but might burn if they're on for the
entire bake. We also like to add toppings halfway
through baking for thick-crusted pizzas such as al
taglio pizza because the dough will get better oven
spring without being weighed down by toppings
before baking.
Don't get too tied to the literal halfway point.
The spirit of this step is that you can apply toppings
almost any time after baking has begun if the topping
requires it. Whether that's three-quarters, halfway,
or one-quarter into the baking time will depend on
the type of topping and/or what texture, flavor, or
color you're trying to get out ofit. The most important thing is to not burn yourself
when applying toppings partway through baking.
We suggest keeping the half-baked pizza on a peel
as you're applying the toppings. Make sure the peel
and pizza are steady and well balanced. Don't put the
pizza on a surface that's temperature sensitive. Close
the oven door to avoid a dramatic temperature drop
and work quickly. Reset your timer, if necessary, after
returning the pizza to the oven.
Applying Toppings After Baking
Some of the most common toppings to put on after
baking are delicate salad greens, herbs, or thinly
shaved vegetables, but those aren't the only things
that you can add once the pizza is baked. Cured
meats like mortadella or capocollo should be applied
after baking so that they are only gently warmed
and the integrity of the product isn't compromised.
Certain sauces, such as aioli or ranch, are temperature sensitive. You can set aside these sauces and use
them for dipping, but it's not out of the question to
spoon or drizzle emulsified or dairy-based sauces
onto a pizza after baking (see page 259). Eggs are
another interesting option. Sometimes an egg is
cracked at the center of a pizza the moment it comes
out of the oven. The idea is that the pizza is hot
352 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Blue cheese added before baking
Blue cheese added halfway through baking
Certain cheeses, like blue cheeses, can melt
into the pizza if applied before baking (see
photos at left). That's why we recommend
putting them on pizzas after baking or just at
the end of baking to preserve their texture and
visual appeal.
10Blue cheese added after baking
enough to cook the egg white just enough so it's not
raw. The problem is, it's not always successful. We
recommend not waiting until the end. Depending on
the pizza, add the egg(s) a minute or two before the
pizza comes out of the oven so the whites are set and
the yolk is still runny. For Neapolitan pizzas, which
have a bake time of 60-90 seconds, put the eggs on
the pizza before baking. The high temperature will
set the whites by the time the pizza is baked.
Slide the pizza onto a cutting board, serving tray,
or platter when it's done baking. Depending on
the topping, you may want to slice the pizza before
adding it. For example, for mortadella and ricotta
"rosettes," cut the pizza first into the desired number
of slices, pipe the ricotta rosettes at the center of
each slice, and fold a disc of mortadella on top of
the ricotta. If you're simply drizzling olive oil on top,
however, apply it first and then cut the pizza.
MATCHING TEXTURES WITH BITE
STRATEGY
Have you ever tucked into a sandwich and had all
the fillings drag out with the first bite? That's poor
sandwich design. This culinary tragedy can also
happen with pizza, and for the same reason: there
was something on it that was too tough for your
teeth to cut through cleanly. As you pull the pizza
away from your mouth, everything connected to that
impenetrable piece of topping comes along with it.
It will land on your chin, chest, plate, the floor, or all
of the above. If it happens to be molten-hot cheese,
your misfortune is compounded.
Sliced cured meats are often the biggest culprits.
It's not necessarily because they're tough; it's just
that a slice of meat can cover a significant amount
of surface area, which can make for an awkward
eating experience. The simplest fix is to use smaller
or even bite-sized pieces (see page 345). Tearing
the slices is the easiest way to accomplish this.
When you cut cured meats with a knife, they tend
to stick to each other and become hard to separate.
Cured meats aren't the only culprits. We've
seen it with eggplant parmigiana and with roasted
whole radicchio leaves. Pretty much any topping
that can cover a surface area larger than the size of
a bite can become a biteability nightmare.
Don't consider just surface area; thickness matters, too. A very thick topping (like a slice of potato
or roasted squash), even if it's bite-sized, will likely
slide off your slice. The simple solution is to make
sure that your toppings are thinly sliced. You can
go high with some things, like salad greens applied
to pizza after baking, but you'll have to either fold
these pizzas to keep everything in place or eat them
with a fork and knife.
We're not saying all of the textures need to be
exactly the same. On the contrary, textural contrast
is a wonderful thing on pizza. But we encourage you
to take these considerations in mind beforehand.
Be sure to prepare your toppings so that they
have the desired biteability on the finished
baked pizza (see page 344). Thinly slicing the
ingredients will almost always guarantee that
they will bake properly on the pizza. Try to
make the toppings more or less the same size
so that they cook at the same rate.
TOPPINGS 353
Margherita Pizza Topping Weights
Topping weigh
bo
1000
800
600
400
200
OUR TOPPINGS DATABASE FINDINGS
When we started this book, we compiled pizza recipes from over 370
books from all over the world, old and new, written in many different
languages (see page 1:320). Creating this database was an integral
part of our research because it helped us to determine if certain pizza
styles had baseline characteristics and standards for ingredients.
When we looked at the toppings section of our database, it helped us
appreciate how vast the variety of pizza toppings is. We recorded the
pizza topping data as a percentage of total weight of the dough. There
are also subcategories within to separate major toppings like saucealone-and cheese-alone-in comparison to the total dough weight.
The charts on the right compare the topping weights of two of the
most popular topping combinations, margherita pizzas and pepperoni pizzas. Both charts plot the toppingweights in relation to the base
weights of the dough showing the wide ranges of both recipe sets.
The toppings component of margherita pizzas in this graph includes
a small variety of ingredients and garnishes. The data is clustered
around what is considered to be the standard size (made from roughly
250 g of dough with 300 g or less of sauce, cheese and toppings) for a
Neapolitan pizza. There are several outlier recipes in this category that
use tomatoes as a topping alongside tomato sauce.
For the pepperoni category, we see the toppings weights more
evenly distributed across the range of the dough weights. Several recipes have an extra finishing ingredients incorporated into the recipes.
P-I-Z-Z-A
이
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Dough weight (g)
Sauce Cheese
Pepperoni Pizza Topping Weights
400 60 350 Toppinsweights
300
250
200
150
100
50
o
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Dough weight (g)
Sauce Cheese Pepperoni
NAPLE
PIZZA
Professional
BAKI
ROBERTA SCHIRA Srontini
PIZZAS
THEpiавоок ROMON
PIZZA GABRIELE BONCI
SICILY
IZZAS PARA LLEVAR REINHA American Pie ETTERIA
Whole Gr OBICA MOZZARELL CUCINA
GABRIELE BONC CRAFT PIZZA
TA ACAMPANIA
alian War
THE agnann PIZZA Quiches & Tartes o
Naples and the Amalfi CoastO & PIZZA
L'arte itatana d fare ta PILZZA
PIZZA
GRILLED PIZZA THE RIGHT WA
Real PIZZA
TRIESTINA
MODEL B
S QUICHES SAVORY PIES MY
REVOLUTIONARY PIZZA
R THE ITALIA ENCYCL
IRD PRO
RENCH
alin
tchen plzza & focaccia
American Pie
PIZZA &WINE AUНЕNСТА
Real PizzA SYRKIN-NIKC & GRILLED PIZZA THE RIGHT WAY
PIZZA ALBA PEZONE
Pizza PROE
NFRE
FOOI PASSIO2
KBOON
Gourmst
Ferrar PIZZA DO FAUSTÁO
FLOUR WATER SALT YEAST
Pizza
TATES | PIZA
Pizzaee to Mahe sndBake Hi
ZA
DERFECTPAN PIZZA
Jim Lahey
kleiman pizz
MY PIZ7А
RFEPT
NEW PIZZA EFANO
Pizza
Pizza
Dizza
IBRO 4 PIZZA
PIZZA DOUGH
NEWPIZZA
LAROUSSE ESCUELA DE PANES Y PIZZAS
PIZZ-N
TRULY Pizzas
GOURMETBIAN
си
Nap
Country
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
COMMON PIZZA TOPPINGS AROUND THE WORLD
Don't discount a topping just because it might seem unusual to you.
After our travels, we've concluded that just about any food can be fair
game as a pizza topping. Toppings often reflect cultural tastes and local
availability. Many pizza chains, like Pizza Hut, Mr. Pizza, and Domino's,
have outposts around the world, and their menus reflect some traditional
Topping
ingredient, flavor, or famous dish from the region (see page 1:145). Those
particular topping combinations may not catch on worldwide, but they
satisfy their all-important local customer base. Here are some popular
toppings from around the world.
anchovies, Fainá (see page 1:40), whole green and black olives, ham, roasted red peppers, sliced fresh tomatoes,
sweated onions
prawns, chicken, ham, barbecue sauce, pineapple, kangaroo
Hawaiian pizza includes: Canadian bacon and pineapple
canned tuna, Calabrese sausage, Catupiry (see page 312), hard-boiled eggs, hearts of palm, olives, shrimp
France bacon, fresh cream, onion, raw egg
India butter chicken, chicken curry, kheema masala, palak paneer
Italy anchovies, basil, garlic, mozzarella, tomatoes
Japan mayo jaga pizza includes: mayonnaise, potato, and bacon
Kenya beef ham, mushrooms, peri peri chicken
Mexico hot sauce/salsa, maggi sauce, squeeze of lime juice
Nigeria tropical pizza includes: sliced banana, Philly steak, mushrooms, and red chilies
Russia
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
United States
moskva pizza includes: sardines, tuna, mackerel, onion, salmon, and red herring; sometimes served cold
boerewors sausage, peri peri sauce
blueberries, corn, cream cheese, fried chicken, kimchi, shrimp, sweet potato
kebab meat, pepperoncini peppers, ham, bananas, pineapple
green bell peppers, mushrooms, olives, onions, pepperoni, sausage, tomatoes
TOPPINGS
From top left, to right: Peri peri sauce,
mackerel, mushrooms, pineapple, pepperoni,
chicken curry, raw egg, kimchi, catupiry, red
chilies, mayonnaise, and prawns
355
10
Although it's not common to see
additional starch used as a topping on
a pizza (the logic being that the crust
already provides a starchy base), it's not
out of the question. In our experience,
mashed potatoes, roasted potatoes,
and fried potatoes work really nicely on
a pizza. Our Gazpacho Pizza on page
3:266 utilizes croutons as a garnish
and the Pixelated Pizza on page 3:98
incorporates pasta tubes as an integral
part of the deep-dish pizza. The key is
to use different forms of starch rather
than additional dough and to not use
an overwhelming amount.
While not technically vegetables (they're a
fungus), truffles are amazing on pizza, whether
they're black or white. They should be sliced to
order directly over the pizza when it comes out
of the oven-or, better yet, in front of the diners
so they can get the full aromatic impact.
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
Fruit isn't the most common pizza topping you'll
see, but it isn't unusual to find fruits such as
nectarines or blueberries on artisan-style pizzas
(and pineapple on the infamous Hawaiian pizza,
of course). Typically, your best bet is to use fresh
fruit, and it will be tastiest (and cheapest) when it's
in season. It's important to consider the amount
of moisture in the fruit and how that might affect
your pizza. Fruits with high moisture content
may need to be cooked before you put them on a
pizza; roasting is a common method used to drive
off excess water and concentrate flavor (see page
360). Frozen fruits release a lot of moisture when
they thaw. Some fruits, like berries, also tend to
break down when frozen and become mushy when
thawed. Fruits can be thinly sliced or cut into
bite-sized pieces and are usually applied partway
through baking or after baking so that they don't
break down too much during baking.
Dried fruits aren't often seen in the world of
pizza, but it's possible to use them creatively, especially if the pizza includes artisan cheese, foie gras,
or cured meats, which harmonize well with dried
fruit. Some options are dates, figs, persimmons,
prunes, or raisins. We recommend mixing dried
fruits into the dough as an inclusion (see page
1:331) instead of using them as a topping. The
challenge is that dried fruits are very low in
moisture and can easily burn, even when used as a
dough inclusion. To resolve this, you can plump the
dried fruits in very hot water (or flavorful liquid)
for a few hours. This way, they'll be pleasant to eat
and won't burn in the oven.
Many vegetable toppings can be applied before
baking. Vegetables tend to be firmer than fruits,
which is why we often suggest a precooking step
for things like broccoli rabe, eggplant, or potatoes.
Other vegetables are better applied to pizza when
they're raw, and often just after the pizza comes
out of the oven. Tender salad greens are an obvious
example. Simply trim, rinse well in cold water, and
pass through a salad spinner to remove excess water.
Keep covered in refrigeration. Other examples of
raw vegetable pizza toppings include thinly sliced
carrots, celery, cucumbers, radishes, or fennel
(although carrots or fennel could be applied before
baking as well). We recommend holding these in ice
water during service.
356 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
COMMON FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROBLEMS
Problem
The pizza gets soggy or doesn't bake because
the fruit or vegetable is too wet.
The fruit or vegetable is too soft and ripe.
The fruit or vegetable slides off the slice.
The fruit is underripe.
Solution
Avoid applying raw fresh fruits and vegetables with a high moisture content before baking because
they can make the pizza soggy. Precooking the toppings can remove some of the moisture and help
mitigate this problem.
This is a matter of personal preference. Consider pureeing the fruit orvegetable and adding it to the
dough or using it as a sauce. You can also do this with overcooked fruits and vegetables.
Always slice or cut the topping down to bite-sized pieces (ideally before it's cooked).
If you cannot wait for fruit to ripen, your best option is to poach it until tender. This will soften it,
but the fruit may still lack flavor. Consider poaching the unripe fruit with a dried version of the fruit,
which can add sufficient flavor.
Too wet Too soft Too thick Not ripe
TOPPINGS 357
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PREPARATIONS
This table doesn't encompass every kind of fruit or vegetable (or all the
cooking methods that you can use to prepare them), but it does offer
our recommendations for some of the most common pizza toppings.
We outline basic cooking methods following this table. Regardless
of the cooking method, you'll need to cut your ingredient into bitesized pieces. We recommend small or medium dice for most fruits and
vegetables, but things like broccoli and cauliflower would make more
sense cut into florets while baby artichokes could be cut into quarters or
eighths, depending on the size. For nearly all of the items listed below,
we recommend adding them to the pizza before baking; the exception
is raw salad greens, which are applied to the pizza after baking. You can
experiment with adding dried fruits and vegetables to your pizza before
or after baking, but we recommend reconstituting them in a flavorful
liquid before using.
Fruit/Vegetable Use fresh?
Apples, pears, or Fuyu persimmons* yes; core, then slice thinly on a mandoline (slice thicker
if cooking)
Recommended cooking method
(if not using fresh)
roast
sauté
sous vide
grill
Baby artichoke hearts no; a precooking step is necessary before using roast
grill
steam
poach
Berries (blueberries, blackberries, raspberries,
strawberries) or currants
yes; although they might pop and make the top of the
pizza a bit wetter than desirable
sauté
Broccoli florets yes; toss in olive oil and season with salt and pepper steam
roast
Broccoli rabe no (the stems are too tough) roast
sauté
Cauliflower florets yes; toss in olive oil and season with salt and pepper roast
deep-fry
sauté
steam
Corn kernels yes roast
char
sauté
Eggplant no roast
sauté
sous vide
Figs yes; trim the stems and cut into quarters, eighths,
or coins
roast
poach
grill
Garlic yes; slice thinly or mince, then toss in olive oil and
season with salt
roast
confit
sauté
Gourds (pumpkin, butternut squash, delicata
squash)
no roast
sauté
sous vide
Greens (spinach, kale, arugula, escarole)
Mushrooms
yes; use after baking sauté
yes; toss in olive oil and season with salt and pepper roast
sauté
Steamed Roasted
10
Fruit/Vegetable Use fresh? Recommended cooking methop
(if not using fresh)
Olives yes (technically they are brined and are never available
raw)
roast
Onions yes; slice thinly, then toss in olive oil and season with salt roast
char
sauté
confit
Peppers (all fresh varieties including hot) yes; toss in olive oil and season with salt and pepper roast
char
Pineapple yes; cut into bite-sized pieces roast
grill
sauté
Potatoes no roast
confit
deep-fry
Quince no roast
poach
steam
pressure-caramelize
Radicchio
Rhubarb
yes; thinly slice or tear into bite-sized pieces after baking sauté
no roast
poach
Stone fruits yes; pit, then slice thinly or cut into halves, quarters, or
eighths
roast
sauté
poach
Summer squash (zucchini and yellow squash)
Sunchokes
Tomatoes
yes; cut into batons, slices, or bite-sized pieces roast
sauté
roast
roast
concasse
*Hachiya persimmons are too mushy to use when ripe.
Not all apple varieties work well for cooking. We
recommend Granny Smith, Golden Delicious, Ginger Gold, Jonagold, Empire, Cameo, Gala, Mclntosh,
Braeburn, and Cortland.
We don't include citrus fruits because they can make
a pizza soggy. We highly recommend using the
flavorful zest, however. Zest citrus peel directly over
the pizza after baking. Tossing fruits and vegetables
in citrus juice can also add flavor. You can also grill or
fry thinly sliced citrus fruits and put them on top of
pizza after baking.
no
yes; cut into halves, quarters, or eighths
When we visited Italy, we noticed a trend of slicing
garlic to order, especially when topping marinara
pizzas, with the same narrow spatula that they use
to lift the dough balls out of the proofing tubs. The
spatula is not sharp, but it's a practical way to cut the
garlic into thick slices. We also saw this in Tokyo, but
we have found that there are other ways of cutting
the garlic, including a garlic slicer (see page 13),
which cuts very thin slices. We also recommend slicing the garlic ahead of time and letting it sit in olive
oil during service. You get the benefit of flavored oil
and you save time by adding both the oil and garlic
in the same step.
Zucchini blossoms are fantastic on pizza; they
should be put on the pizza before baking or
halfway through baking if you don't want to them
to wilt too much. They can also be stuffed with
cheese, battered, and deep-fried to be added to
pizza after baking.
To roast olives, drain them and toss them in olive oil
along with any combination of herbs and spices that
will complement your pizza's flavor profile. Roast
them in a 260°C/500° F oven for 10-15 minutes, or
until aromatic and slightly dry. This technique both
concentrates the flavor and removes some of the
moisture that could leak out onto the pizza. Just be
mindful that they'll be baked a second time, so don't
dry them out so far that they burn when they are
baked on the pizza.
Sous vide Grilled Ingredients like canned artichokes or pineapple
and jarred peppers are great topping options. They
do not need additional prep, aside from draining,
before using on pizza since they are typically cooked
before canning.
For more on how to concasse tomatoes, see page 226.
HOW TO Roast Fruits
6
PRECOOKING TECHNIQUES
Here are some of our go-to techniques for cooking
fruits and vegetables to prepare them as pizza toрpings. While not a comprehensive list, these
are the methods used most commonly for fruits
and vegetables.
ROASTING
The main goal in roasting fruits and vegetables is to
remove as much water as possible, thereby concentrating the flavor-and avoiding a soggy pizza. This
slow-cooking method relies on hot air, so the food
loses a large amount of water, especially from its
surface. This surface-water loss, in combination with
heat, sugars, and proteins, will produce browning
via the Maillard reaction (see page 393). When
roasting, consider the time it will take for the oven's
heat to penetrate whatever you're cooking all the
way to the core. If you want your food to cook faster,
cut it into smaller pieces. Roasting in a convection
oven will speed things up even more because there's
constant, even heat blowing directly on the surface
of the food. Once the fruit or vegetable is cooked,
let it cool completely before you apply it to a pizza.
Roasted fruits and vegetables can be refrigerated or
frozen for later use.
For fruit, the best results are achieved with fruits
that can retain their shape and texture while roasting
rather than turning to mush. Although unripe fruits
are firmer, we recommend using ripe fruits because
their flavor will be sweeter and more pronounced.
When preparing fruit for roasting, you may optionally also toss the fruit in 20% of its weight in sugar.
This will sweeten the fruit lightly if needed and pull
some moisture out of the fruit to help it roast faster.
If you perform this step, toss the cut fruit pieces with
the sugar, allow the fruit to sit in the bowl for 30-45
minutes, then place the fruit in a colander to drain
excess moisture. Reserve this sweetened liquid for
other purposes.
Vegetables tend to be tougher than fruits and
can withstand higher roasting temperatures. We
recommend coating vegetables in olive oil not only to
conduct heat to the ingredient more quickly but also
to help adhere any seasoning. Ifyou want to achieve
even more browning on your vegetables, you can
roast them at a higher temperature. Just keep in mind
that they'll be subjected to a hot oven when the pizza
is baking, so you don't want them to be so browned
that they'll burn when they are baked again.
8 10
1
Preheat a deck or home oven to 135° C/
275° F or a convection oven to 120° C/
250°F with the fan on low speed.
2 Trim and cut the fruit as needed. You can
add spices and herbs to the fruit before
roasting.
3 Line a sheet pan with aluminum foil.
4 Place a wire rack on top of the foil-lined
sheet pan.
5 Spray the wire rack with a light mist of
cooking oil.
6
Place the fruit on the wire rack in a single
layer, if possible. Do not overcrowd or it
will steam rather than roast.
7 Place the pan in the oven; leave the vent
open or the door slightly ajar so that water
evaporating from the fruit can escape.
8 Roast the fruit until it is just tender, not
mushy. It may take on some color (browning on the edges) from cooking.
9
Remove the pan from the oven and let the
fruit cool on the wire rack.
10 The fruit can be used to top a pizza or
stored in an airtight container in the
refrigerator for up to 3 d or in the freezer
for up to 3 mo. If refrigerated, warm
slightly before using. If you freeze it, once
it thaws, it will release water; thaw it in a
colander or ona perforated surface so
that the excess water drips off.
360 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Roast Vegetables
2 4
1 Preheat a deck or home oven to
205°C/400° F or a convection oven to
190°C/375°F with the fan on low speed.
3 Place the vegetable on a sheet pan (nonstick or lined with aluminum foil) cut-side
down in a single layer, if possible. Do not
overcrowd or it will steam rather than roast.
6
2 Trim and cut the vegetable as needed. Toss
with olive oil to coat completely, and season as desired.
4 Roast the vegetable until it is cooked
through.
5 Remove the pan from the oven and let the
vegetable cool. If you roasted the vegetables whole, cut them into smaller pieces.
The vegetable can be used to top a pizza or
stored in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 3 d or in the freezer for up
to 3 mo. If refrigerated, warm slightly
before using. If you freeze it, once it thaws,
it will release water; thaw it in a colander or
on a perforated surface so that the excess
water drips off.
The roasting time will vary from oven to oven and depending on the kind of fruit
or vegetable that you are cooking. Always check for doneness by touching the
fruit or vegetable or sliding a wooden skewer or fork through the flesh (never a
knife, which is sharp and will slide easily into many foods whether they're cooked
or not). Ifthe utensil slides in and out easily, the item is ready to come out of the
oven. If not, let it continue to roast and check every 3 to 5 minutes. It's not possible to use the core temperature to gauge for doneness; a thermometer is too big
to insert into most pieces of fruits or vegetables.
If you want, you can season vegetables with salt, pepper, spices, and/or herbs.
We suggest seasoning vegetables prior to roasting them, after tossing them with
olive oil.
New York pizza with New York tomato sauce,
pizza cheese, roasted red peppers, roasted
eggplant, green olives, pine nuts, and fresh basil
10
If you want, you can season your sautéed vegetables with salt, pepper, and/
or other spices. For some vegetables,
such as spinach, kale, or escarole, we
suggest doing this once the vegetable
is close to being cooked or completely
cooked because it will lose so much
volume once cooked. If you season it
at the start, you might overseason since
it looks like much more than what you
end up with.
You can combine a sautéed vegetable
with other ingredients, such as garlic or
onions, to complement its flavor. Combine vegetables in the sauté pan only if
you are sure they will cook at the same
time. You can also add an herb to the
mix, as well as other ingredients, such
as cured meats like bacon or chorizo.
SAUTÉING
Sautéing is the technique of cooking food in a small
amount offat in a shallow pan. It sounds simple
enough, but the method requires special care and
attention. The goal is to cook the food quickly, but
the speed hinges on how high the heat is and how
long it takes that heat to penetrate to the food's
core. As the surface of the food dries in contact
with the pan, browning via the Maillard reaction
will shortly follow.
Remember that the smaller the mass of the food
you're cooking, the higher the heat you'll use to cook
it. For instance, thinly sliced potatoes or onions will
benefit from a blazing-hot pan to cook them quickly,
while high heat may cause thicker pieces of food,
HOW TO Sauté Fruits and Vegetables
1
such as cauliflower florets, to burn on the outside
before they cook at the core. Fat (oil, butter, lard, or
shortening) is typically used to conduct heat and to
keep food from sticking to the pan.
Be sure to allow plenty of space in the pan. This
will help the water in the food evaporate rather than
accumulate, which would cause the food to steam
and overcook before it browns. The pan should be
large enough to easily accommodate all the sliced
fruits or vegetables and make stirring easy; you can
work in batches if you don't have a pan large enough
or have a large amount of fruits and vegetables to
cook. Unlike other vegetables, leafy greens such as
spinach should be piled into the pan since they lose a
lot of volume during cooking.
1 Trim and cut the fruit or vegetable as
needed.
2 Heat the fat in a sauté pan over
medium-high heat.
3 When the fat begins to bubble (or the oil is
just about ready to smoke), add the fruit or
vegetable and stir well to coat. Season if
desired.
4
5
Lower the heat to medium if you are sautéing thicker pieces of food. Otherwise,
maintain the medium-high heat.
Stir every 2-3 min with a wooden spoon or
silicone spatula so that the ingredient cooks
evenly. Do not leave the pan unattended. If
the ingredient is starting to char in some
spots but is not cooking evenly, add some
water to the pan and continue to cook.
Artisan pizza with sautéed radicchio,
New York/ artisan pizza tomato sauce,
and pizza cheese
6
7
Once the item has turneda deep brown
and is soft, remove the pan from the heat
and allow it to cool.
When cool, the ingredient can be used to
top a pizza or refrigerated in an airtight
container for up to 5 d. If refrigerated,
warm slightly or temper for a few hours
before using.
Lightly sautéing vegetables will sweat them and make them
just tender. If you sauté certain vegetables, like onions,
for a prolonged period, they will caramelize. If you want
the ingredients to brown, do not stir them as often during
cooking.
If you want to incorporate a fried topping onto your pizza
but you don't have a deep fryer (see page 368) or you don't
want to invest in using a lot of oil, you can use the shallow
frying technique.This method uses the same basic steps of
sautéing, but you need to increase the amount of oil in the
pan. It should come one-third to halfway up the food that
you are frying. Heat the oil to 175°C/350° F (check the temperature of the oil if you are frying multiple batches to make
sure that the oil temperature has recovered). Place the item
in the pan and fry it until it is golden brown on one side. Flip
it and brown the other side. Transfer the fried ingredient to a
sheet pan lined with paper towels to drain the excess oil. It is
just as important that you not overcrowd the pan so that the
toppings don't steam and become limp and pale. You can
coat your toppings with the Tempura Batter on page 3:281 if
you'd like.
STEAMING
Steaming is among the fastest ways to cook food.
The point is to create an enclosed 100°C/212°F
environment of constant heat in contact with the
food. When water vapor condenses on the cool
surface of a piece of food, it releases its stored energy
and heats the food; this is called the latent heat of
vaporization. Think of it as energy stored in the
HOW TO Steam Fruits and Vegetables
1
Trim and cut the fruit or vegetable as
needed.
2 Prepare an ice bath (equal parts water and
ice) with sufficient water and ice to fully
submerge the item once it is cooked.
3 Fill a pot with 1.25 cm / Y/½ in of water and
place a steaming basket over it. The pot and
the basket should be large enough to fit all
of the items and still allow the lid to be
placed on top.
4 Cover the pot with a lid.
5 Bring the water to a boil over high heat.
6 Put the ingredient in the basket and immediately replace the lid.
7 Check for doneness after 5 min; if the ingredient isn't done, check at 2-min intervals.
8 Shock the steamed ingredient in the ice
bath.
9
Drain the water. The ingredient can be
used to top a pizza or refrigerated in an
airtight containerfor up to 5 d. If refrigerated, warm slightly or temper for a few
hours before using.
water vapor. Because the transition from liquid to
vapor requires so much energy, steam contains far
more energy than boiling water does, which is why
it takes less time to cook food by steaming than by
boiling. To check steamed vegetables for doneness,
slide a toothpick or skewer into the thickest part of
the food. It should slide in and out easily. For green
vegetables, the color should still be vibrant.
CHARRING TOPPINGS
To char a food, we lightly burn its surface (without necessarily cooking
the food through), often using a flame from a torch, broiler, or salamander. You can also char foods over an open gas flame if you prefer. The
goal is to blacken the surface, which lends a lightly grilled flavor. You
can use this method to char peppers and remove the skins (after charring, place the peppers in a bowl and cover them with plastic, which
softens the skin and makes them easier to peel) or onions or shucked
corn to add another flavor dimension to your pizza. We recommend
cutting large calamari into bite-sized pieces (after removing the skin),
scoring them, and charring them with a torch or grill. It seems obvious
to say, but don't ever try this technique over a flammable surface. We
usually place a wire rack on a sheet pan, place the food on top, and
then apply the heat.
TOPPINGS 363
10
Another cooking method that involves
submerging food in water is poaching. You simply submerge the food in
liquid that is just below a simmer, at
60-82°C/140-180° F. Make sure that
the poaching liquid is very flavorful.
You can also simmer or boil fruits or
vegetables; this takes less time but the
cooking method is more aggressive and
may not be suitable for more delicate
fruits or vegetables.
COOKING SOUS VIDE
One of the benefits of cooking sous vide is that it
greatly reduces anxiety about cooking times and
temperatures. If you leave the food in for a little
more time than the recipe suggests, the consequences aren't nearly as perceptible as they are when
you cook on a stove top or in a hot oven. While it
employs some special equipment and know-how,
it takes a lot of the guesswork out of cooking and
allows you to achieve consistent results, which is
especially helpful in commercial settings like pizzerias. The four basic steps in cooking sous vide are
preparing, packaging, cooking, and finishing. Most
recipes call for cooking an ingredient (especially
meats) to a specific core temperature, meaning that
you remove the food from the bath as soon as the
temperature of its thickest part hits the target. If you
set the temperature ofthe water bath or oven to just
a degree or two higher than the target temperature,
you won't have to worry about overcooking. This
approach works well for tender red meats, poultry,
fish and other seafood, and certain fruits and vegetables. Tough meats, however, are cooked atlower
temperatures and often take a significant amount of
time to tenderize.
Prepare and organize the ingredient for cooking
sous vide much as you would for any other technique. Make the pieces as similar in thickness and
size as possible so that when cooked together, they
are all done at the same time. You can add flavors
by seasoning, marinating, brining, or curing before
cooking. You can also change the color or texture
of certain ingredients by searing or blanching them
before cooking sous vide.
Food is usually packaged before cooking in a
water bath (the most common method); if you
just put the food directly in the water bath (e.g.,
poaching), some of the flavor and juices could
wash away. Restaurants and caterers who cook sous
vide vacuum-seal the food in special plastic bags.
Vacuum-sealed bags are less likely to float, and
they allow cooked food to keep longer in the refrigerator after cooking, which is handy.
Home vacuum sealers are now widely available
and easy to use, but you don't need to vacuum-pack
food to cook it sous vide. Zip-top bags work fine,
except when cooking foods for a very long time.
HOW TO Sous Vide Fruits and Vegetables
2
1
Trim and cut the ingredient. The pieces
should be roughly similar in size and
thickness.
2 To vacuum seal, place portions of the ingredient in separate sous vide bags, optionally
add water or oil, and seal. You can also use
zip-top bags or canning jars.
364
3
Cook the food to the set temperature in a
water bath or combi oven. If the bags are
floating in a water bath, use binder clips or
a water rack to hold them under water; the
food should be fully submerged.
4 Sear the food in a pan, on a grill, in a deep
fryer, or with a blowtorch, if desired.
5
When cool, the ingredient can be used to
top a pizza or refrigerated in an airtight
container for up to 5 d. If refrigerated,
warm slightly before using.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Canning jars offer another convenient alternative
in many situations. If you use a combi oven rather
than a water bath to cook sous vide, you don't need
any packaging at all--simply put the food in an open
pan, and stick it in the oven.
Both water baths and combi ovens require preheating, which usually takes 15-30 minutes, before
the food goes in. The bath or oven temperature
that you select will depend on the type of food and
the degree of doneness you prefer. We offer cxtensive tables and recipes in both Modernist Cuisine
and Modernist Cuisine at Home that can serve as a
starting point.
When cooking to a target core temperature
given in a recipe or table, set the water bath 1-2°C/
2-3° F hotter than the target temperature. (Although
setting the bath much hotter does accelerate cooking, it makes timing trickier, so we don't recommend
it.) Use a probe thermometer to keep tabs on the
internal temperature until you gain confidence in
knowing how long particular foods of a given thickness take to cook this way.
The cooking time required varies as a function of
both the kind of food and the thickness. As a rough
rule, doubling the thickness ofthe food quadruples
the cooking time. Note, however, that you don't
need to adjust holding times (the time you can hold
it in the water bath after the core temperature is
reached); once the core has hit the target temperature, the holding time doesn't vary with the thickness of the food.You can experiment with longer or
shorter holding times, however, to achieve different
textures. Each kind of food responds differently as
cooking continues.
Food cooked sous vide takes on a texture and
appearance similar to that offood that has been
poached or steamed (see page 363). Ifthat's acceptable, simply open the bag, and prep the ingredient
for topping your pizza. Some foods, however, look
and taste much better if you give them a seared
crust. Searing not only browns the food but also
generates flavorful compounds that form only at
high temperatures. Because the interior of the food
is cooked to perfection, you want to use very high
heat to quickly sear only the exterior of the food.
Pan-searing is perhaps the easiest method, but you
can instead use a blowtorch, grill, or deep fryer (see
page 368).
Cooking certain toppings sous vide, especially
delicate items or tough meats, before using
them on a pizza will ensure that they have
the proper texture when you are eating the
finished pizza.
We cooked rhubarb sous vide to top a pizza
with foie gras and pistachios.
TOPPINGS 365
10
COOKING FOOD SUBMERGED IN
OIL (CONFIT)
Although cooking confit is similar to frying (see
page 368), there are key differences-namely,
whatever you confit is cooked in fat at much lower
temperatures and for much longer. A few methods
for confit toppings are detailed below: pressure
cooker, low-temperature oven, and stove top. The
first method is best suited for home cooks while the
other two can be used by professionals and home
cooks alike.
We don't recommend cooking most fruits in oil,
although we've had success cooking quince, cherries,
dates, and Granny Smith apples in clarified butter.
Mangoes, guavas, and pineapples can work when
cooked in coconut oil (as can coconuts).
All three methods below can also be applied to
meats. For larger pieces of meat that won't fit in a jar
in the pressure cooker method, skip steps 1-5. You'll
have to add enough fat to the pot to completely
cover the meat being confited. Depending on the
size of your pressure cooker, you may need to add
more than what renders from the meat itself. For
step 11, the ingredients and fat can be transferred to
an airtight container and kept in refrigeration for up
to 3 months. Make sure the confited ingredient is
completely submerged in the fat.
HOW TO Confit in a Pressure Cooker
2 13 14
1
Trim and cut the ingredient. The pieces
should be roughly similar in size and
thickness.
2 Fill a mason jar two-thirds of the way with
the ingredient to be confited.
3 Fill the rest of the jar with the chosen fat.
4 Close the jar's lid but not too tightly (not
too loosely, either).
5 Fillthe pressure cooker with about 2.5 cm/
1 in of water.
6 Place a trivet in the pressure cooker.
7 Place the jar on the trivet.
To use an instapot, follow steps 1-7 of the method
above. Set the instapot to Pressure Cook mode.
Select 12 psi (High) and set the time for 1 h. Lock the
lid onto the pot and confit the ingredients. When the
instapot has depressurized, cool the contents. Proceed with step 14 in the pressure cooker instructions
above.
8 Bring the water to a simmer over high heat
without the lid on the pressure cooker.
9 Once the water reaches a simmer, close the
lid securely on the pressure cooker.
10 Turn the heat to medium.
11 Bring the pressure to 1 bar /15 psi (about
117° C/243° F) inside the cooker.
12 Cook for 1½ h, adjusting the heat as
needed to maintain steady pressure
inside the pot.
The term "confit" is used to describe cooking something in oil, but it is a misnomer in most cases since
the true meaning is cooking and preserving something in its own fat.
13 Allow the pressure cooker to cool completely at room temperature before
opening the lid.
14 Remove the jars and let them cool to
room temperature.
15 Drain the fat from the jar before placing
the confit ingredient on top of the pizza,
or close the jar and refrigerate for up to 3
mo. If refrigerated, warm the jar under
hot water and drain the fat before using
the topping.
It's important to realize that overpressurizing the
cooker doesn't make the temperature inside any
higher-it merely causes the safety valve to release
steam, which allows the water inside to resume
boiling. Repeated overpressurization can ruin both
the flanges and the seal around the lid.
366 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
10HOW TO Confit in a Low-Temperature Oven
1 Trim and cut the ingredient. The pieces
should be roughly similar in size and
thickness.
4 Pour the chosen fat over the ingredient so
that it is completely submerged. Cover with
foil.
6 Cool the pan completely at room
temperature.
2 Preheat the oven to 120° C/250°F (if convection, turn off the fan or set it at the lowest speed possible).
3 Filla hotel pan or deep baking pan twothirds of the way with the ingredient.
HOW TO Confit on the Stove
1 Trim and cut the ingredient. The pieces
should be roughly similar in size and
thickness.
2 Fill a saucepot two-thirds of the way with
the ingredient.
3 Pour the chosen fat over the ingredient so
that it is completely submerged. Cover with
a lid.
5 Place the pan in the warm oven and allow
the ingredient to cook until tender, 3-4 h
(check every hour).
4 Place the pan over the lowest possible heat
and allow the ingredient to cook until tender, 2-3 h (check every hour).
5 Cool the pan completely at room
temperature.
Artisan pizza with heavy cream, ricotta, Swiss cheese, cheddar cheese, braised trotters,
sweated onion, potato confit, and garlic confit
7
6
Drain the fat from the pan before placing
the confit ingredient on top of the pizza, or
transfer the ingredient along with the fat to
an airtight container and refrigerate for up
to 3 mo. If refrigerated, warm the container
under hot water and drain the fat before
using the topping.
Drain the fat from the pan before placing
the confit ingredient on top of the pizza, or
transfer the ingredient along with the fat to
an airtight container and refrigerate for up
to 3 mo. If refrigerated, warm the container
under hot water and drain the fat before
using the topping.
Topping the pizza with crispy deep-fried
items towards the end of baking or after
baking will add another level of texture to
the finished pizza.
However you choose to cut the vegetables, it is very important that you try
to keep them about the same size so
that they will cook and fry in the same
amount of time.
DEEP-FRYING
When food comes in contact with hot oil, the oil
affects only the surface of the food. Below the surface, the food behaves no differently than if the heat
was coming from hot air or water. The heat from
frying, however, is much higher than from water
or steam, and much more efficient at conducting
heat than air. The hot fat used for frying becomes
an ingredient, as some of it permeates the surface
of the food; it therefore can contribute some flavor,
but it will only minimally be absorbed by the surface.
Cooking food in oil has the same effect whether
you're submerging it completely in very hot fat, shallow frying it, or cooking it at a lower temperature,
as with confit (see page 366); the only difference is
how long it takes the food to cook.
Fat can only get so hot before it begins to burn.
This is called the smoke point, a self-explanatory
term for the temperature at which the oil begins to
smoke. That temperature varies from fat to fat. Most
fats reach their smoke point long before they combust, so it may be tempting to inch the oil temperature up as high as possible. This isn't recommended.
In general, 175–190°C / 350-375°F is a good range
for frying most foods; you typically don't want
to fry at a temperature higher than 190–200°C/
375-390° F because the outside could burn before
the interior of the food is cooked. Vegetables that
HOW TO Deep-Fry Directly
4a
fry well with the direct method (without a batter
or starch coating) are brussels sprouts, potatoes,
shallots, eggplant, zucchini, and leeks.
Alternatively, you can dip the vegetable in a
batter or coat it in a starch to make it extra crispy
on the outside. If you are simply going to coat the
vegetable in starch, it needs to be slightly moistened
on the surface for the starch to attach itself to it.
Some starches are better than others for producing
a crispy surface. Some vegetables that work well for
batter frying are potatoes, sweet potatoes, squashes
and gourds, cauliflower or broccoli, onions, pickles,
green tomatoes, and green beans. And, of course,
battered fried chicken is delicious on pizza.
Because of the way pizza is baked, it's not very
common for a topping to be crispy unless it's been
added after baking. Anything battered and fried (or
shallowfried, like crispy bacon) becomes soft and
soggy if baked with the other toppings (including
cheese and sauce). But when added after baking, it
will stay crisp for much longer. The only downside is
it has nothing binding it to the slice and thus might
roll off easily. Fried toppings need to be strategically
placed on the pizza so they can be held inside a
folded slice. We include two types of crispy toppings,
rösti potatoes and frico (cheese crisps), that can cover
the pizza in its entirety, which means that there will be
a crispy texture in every bite.
46
The pizza on the next page features deep-fried
baby artichokes as a crunchy textural component to the finished pizza.
1 Preheat the fryer to 175°C/350° F.
2 Trim and cut the ingredient. The pieces should be
roughly similar in size and thickness.
3 Place the ingredient in a frying basket and cook
until browned and cooked through (the time will
depend on the ingredient and the size of the
batch).
4 Transfer the fried ingredient to a sheet pan lined
with paper towels to drain the excess oil.
5 Place the topping on the baked pizza and serve
immediately.
368 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
RÖSTI POTATOES TOTAL TIME YIELD
INGREDIENT WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING % ☑
Russet potatoes, peeled 800 g 3-4 ea 100
A
Active 25 min/ one 20 cm/8 in discs Butter, melted 150 g
Fine salt 7g
2/3 cup
114 tsp
18.75 Inactive 40-45 min
0.88
PROCEDURE
1 Preheat a convection oven to 190° C/375°F
or a home oven to 205°C/400° F.
2
3
4
Using the smallest shredding attachment on
a mandolin (1.5 mm/0.06 in), slice the
potatoes into long thin strips. Store the
potatoes in water while working to prevent
oxidation. This should yield about 650 g
(6/½ cups) shredded potatoes.
Transfer the shredded potatoes to a container filled with ice water and agitate to
rinse off the starch; alternatively, rinse
under running water.
Spread the potatoes out on a sheet pan
lined with kitchen towels or paper towels,
and pat dry.
5 Transfer the potatoes to a bowl.
6 Pour the butter over the potatoes and add
the salt. Mix well to coat.
7 Heat a 25 cm/10 in oven-safe nonstick
skillet over medium high heat.
8 When the pan is hot, add the potatoes,
tamping down with a rubber spatula or
wooden spoon to form a disk that is roughly
the same size as the skillet.
9 Cook over medium-high heat until the
potatoes have begun to stick together and
color slightly on the bottom, about 5 min.
10 Transfer the pan to the oven and cook until
the top is slightly golden brown, about10
min in a convection oven or 15 min in a
home oven.
11 Quickly and carefully invert the rösti onto a
rimless plate, and then slide back into the
hot pan.
12 Bake until golden brown and cooked
through, about 15 min in a convection oven
or 20 min in a home oven.
13 Transfer the rösti to a sheet pan lined with a
wire rack to cool.
14 Re-crisp and reheat the rösti for 5-7 minutes
at 190°C/375° F in a convection oven or
205°C/400° F in a home oven.
15 Cut the rösti into the same number of slices
as you will be cutting the pizza and place
one wedge on top of each slice of pizza.
2 6
11 13
It is crucial to the success of this preparation that the
potatoes be cut into a uniform thickness so that they
cook at the same time; their length matters less.
We would use this size rösti on a 30 cm/12 in pizza
since we do not want it to cover the crust. Making
a larger rösti for a larger pizza is possible; you will
need a larger pan, of course, and turning it over
gets a little more complicated due to the size, so be
careful.
If you really want to go the extra mile, cut the rösti
into the same number of slices you plan on cutting
the pizza into. Deep-fry them in a fryer or pot filled
with 175°C/350°F oil for 2-3 min. Blot the excess oil
on paper towels, and then place one on each slice of
the just-baked pizza.
Rösti is typically topped with sour cream or crème
fraîche and chives; we highly recommend this addition if it fits in with the flavor profile of your pizza.
You can julienne the potatoes in three different ways.
Use a mandoline to slice the potatoes very thinly,
1.5 mm/0.06 in thick. Stack 8-10 slices into a pile,
and cut into 1.5 mm/0.06 in wide pieces. Alternatively, use a mandoline that has a julienne blade
attachment or use a turning vegetable slicer with the
julienne blade attachment.
TOPPINGS 371
10
FRICO (CHEESE CRISPS)
INGREDIENT
Hard cheese (Parmigiano-Reggiano, Grana Padano, 200 g 2 cups
Asiago, aged gouda), finely grated
PROCEDURE
1 Preheat an oven to 205° C/400°F.
2 Line a sheet pan with a silicon baking mat.
3 Spread the cheese in a single layer.
3
Wewere inspired by how delicious this topping
is on pizza and decided to try wrapping slices of
baked pizza in frico. The method allowed us to give
new life to leftovers (see page 3:283).
372
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
100
Active 8-10 min/
Inactive 10 min
twenty-five
7.5 cm/3 in squares
4 Bake until golden brown, about 10 min.
5 Once ready, cut into square pieces using a
pizza cutter, or break into square size pieces
by hand.
6 Store in an airtight container lined with
clean paper towels for up to 2 wk.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PRESSURE-CARAMELIZING
When we were writing Modernist Cuisine, we developed a method for caramelizing food under pressure
using baking soda to accelerate the process. This
produces particularly flavorful results, intensifying
the caramelization of sugars (in both the food and
the additional sugar itself) and concentrating the
flavors through the alkalinity of the baking soda
combined with the heat buildup at 120°C / 250°F in
the pressure cooker.
INGREDIENT WEIGHТ VOLUMЕ SCALING%
Main ingredient(s) 200 g
varies 100
Butter, melted 60 g 14 cup 30
Sugar 40 g 14 cup 20
Baking soda 1g 8 tsp 0.5
To use an instapot, set the instapot to Sauté. Melt the butter in the cooker. Add the
main ingredient(s), sugar, and baking soda. Stir well to combine. Switch the instapot
to Pressure Cook mode. Select 12 psi (High) and set the time for 1 h. Lock the lid
onto the pot and pressure-caramelize the ingredients. When the instapot has
depressurized, cool the contents before using on a pizza.
PROCEDURE
1 Combine all the ingredients well in a bowl.
2 Spoon the ingredients into canning jars;
close the lids but not too tightly (not too
loosely, either).
3 Place a trivet in the pressure cooker.
4 Place the jars on the trivet.
5 Fill the pressure cooker with enough water
to reach halfway up the jars.
6 Bring the water to a simmer over high heat
without the lid on the pressure cooker.
7 Once the water reaches a simmer, close the
lid securely on the pressure cooker.
8 Bring the pressure to 1 bar /15 psi (about
117° C/243° F) inside the cooker.
9 Cook for 1 h, adjusting the heat as needed
to maintain steady pressure inside the pot.
10 Allow the pressure cooker to cool completely at room temperature before opening the lid.
11 Remove the jars and let them cool to room
temperature.
12 Once cool, the caramelized ingredient is
ready to top a pizza. Store for up to 3 mo
under refrigeration.
It's important to realize that overpressurizing the cooker doesn't make the temperature inside any higher-it merely causes
the safety valve to release steam, which
allows the water inside to resume boiling.
Repeated overpressurization can ruin both
the flanges and the seal around the lid.
Thin-crust pizza with curry cream
sauce, paneer, pizza cheese, fried
chickpeas, fried curry leaves, and
pressure-caramelized carrots
2
10
18
12
MEATS
Pizzas are commonly topped with fresh or cured
meats, with pepperoni and sausage being two of the
most popular examples from these categories. Cured
meats make great toppings for pizza and are more
commonly used than raw meat since they are more
shelf stable and practical for most pizzerias. These
types of meat tend to be highly seasoned and bring
special flavors to the pizza. Cured meats are often
very hard, so they need to be sliced super thin or
they are difficult to eat and could pull off the slice.
Some cured meats are best placed on the pizza
before baking, while others should go on after
baking (see our recommendations in the table on
page 377). Higher-fat cured meats like pepperoni
benefit from baking since some of their fat will
render out and crisp them up. Other cured meats
fare poorly if cooked-like prosciutto, which will
render into a salty flavorless crisp-and are thus
best applied after baking.
Some pizza makers put raw fresh pork sausage
on pizza before baking it, but we prefer to precook
it for several reasons. The first is that this gives you
the opportunity to brown the sausage, which adds
flavor. Another important reason is that this will
ensure that the sausage is cooked through, especially
for pizzas like deep-dish, which have a plethora of
toppings and take a long time to bake through. Alternatively, you can put raw fresh sausage on thin-crust
or medium-crust pizzas before baking if it's in very
small pieces, which will cook completely in the oven.
There's also a large set of pork and beef sausages
called emulsified sausages that includes things like
mortadella, bratwurst, and hot dogs, among others.
In general, these can be a challenge to use on pizza.
Mortadella is commonly used on pizza but it's added
after baking because it burns easily and baking
doesn't improve its flavor. Hot dogs can be put on
pizza but you have to make sure they are precooked
before slicing and adding them to your pizza. Most
other types of emulsified sausages aren't going to do
very well in the heat of the oven without burning,
but it's possible to use them if you find them in a raw
form and parcook them.
When you make sausages, especially in the case
of emulsified sausages like hot dogs, you need to
use really finely ground spices. In fact, you can
Not all meats will stick together when
sliced. Ham, for example, may not stick
to other slices of ham when placed
on parchment paper, but prosciutto
certainly will. Unsticking slices of meat
during a busy service (or even in your
own home) is not a problem you want
to contend with. Some meats, like pepperoni, don't require much care since
they won't stick to each other; you can
just slice them intoa pile in a tub or
other container (although most pizza
makers buy presliced pepperoni).
A meat slicer is the ideal tool for slicing cured
meats, followed by buying meat already sliced
from a delior even the grocery store. One of the
main concerns with slicing most whole cured
meats (as opposed to meats thatare made of
ground components, like salami) is to make
sure to slice against the grain. This makes these
meats easy to bite into and will help prevent
topping drag (see page 345). Slicing by hand
is not recommended unless you have excellent
cutting skills and a very sharp knife.
ossal
TOPPINGS 375
10
Some of the most popular meats to use
on pizza, like pepperoni and sausage,
are both highly seasoned and cheaper
than whole cuts of meat. Because these
meats are highly seasoned, you don't
have to use very much but note that
using meat sparingly is also in keeping
with pizza's history as a cheap food for
the poor (see page 1:16).
Italian prosciutto, like most European
hams, is a raw product cured with
salt for months. That ham is also sold
in the US as cured ham (Smithfield is
an example). In the US, ham without
a modifier will refer to cooked ham,
which is usually precooked, cured pork
leg that has a much higher moisture
content than a cured ham.
order "sausage spices" from companies that come
preground to the correct fineness. If your homemade
pork sausage becomes too cohesive and tough when
you cook it, that's almost always because you've
salted it too much or too far ahead of time and let it
sit. If you don't bind the sausage properly and put it
in a casing, when you cut the sausage, little grains of
meat will pour out. This is typically caused by the
grinder getting too hot. It cooks the exterior of the
tiny pieces of meat just enough so that theywon't
bind (it's almost as if it cauterizes the granules of
meat).This is why you should start with really cold
meat and equipment.
We couldn't find "Italian" sausage as we
know it when we visited Italy. We found
some pizzerias using fresh pork sausage
but it didn't have the same flavor profile
that you find in the United States. It's
worth noting that both sweet Italian and
hot Italian sausages have sugar; the hot
Italian just has additional spices.
In Chicago, arguably the place where
sausage is the most popular meat topping for pizza, we saw almost all of the
pizza makers putting their sausage on
loose and raw (usually by pinching off
small pieces and scattering them across
the pizza). One exception was at Gino's
East, which uses a sausage puck that
s the same diameter as the deep-dish
pizza as one oftheir filling layers.
these thin slices have a chance of overcooking while
the pizza bakes, however. One solution is to properly
cook fresh meat, slice it, store it in refrigeration until
you are ready to use it, and then put it on the pizza
toward the end of baking so that it just warms up.
There are certainly other animal products you
can use as toppings, including beef, poultry, fish, and
shellfish. While fresh sausage is popular, you don't
typically see a lot of cuts of fresh meat used on pizza,
such as steak or chicken. These forms of meat can be
expensive and putting them on pizza might diminish
their quality because they typically won't cook
properly. These types of meat also need to be very
thinly sliced so that they easily eaten on the pizza;
Another important factor is when you put the
meat on the pizza so it has sufficient time to fully
cook (without overcooking). Seafood is problematic
because the pizza oven is vastly hotter than most seafood likes to be. Octopus, which has been precooked
for a long time can be applied to the pizza before
baking. Shellfish like oysters or clams can be put on
before or during baking (just be sure that they don't
become rubbery). For smoked fish or shellfish, you'll
want to put it on after baking to preserve the flavor
and texture. Chicken breast, thighs, and legs can be
roasted, sautéed, or poached and put on before baking, but make sure to surround or cover them with
cheese and sauce to prevent overcooking. We focus
on cured meats and fresh sausage in this chapter but
encourage you to experiment with a wide variety of
meats as toppings for your pizza.
SALAMIN SRASERD
ICIOTO
LLITO
$120=
LONGNVSA CALABR420SALAME
CIERVO
SALAME SLA
 de
PURO CERD PURO $105
BELITOS 120-
liva
lona
When we visited the San Telmo market in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, we found a multitude
of cured sausages that could be used on pizza.
Like in Italy (see page 378), we saw that these
were used in limited amounts on pizza.
S
376
PAI PAN
DELICIOSO YOGURT
vaca Y Cabra PROBALOS
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PREPARING CURED MEATS
If you don't find a specific type of cured meat here, find the one that
looks closest to it from the list below. All cured meats should be refrigerated until they're needed. Sliced cured meats can burn if exposed while
TYPE OF MEAT
Apply before baking
Bacon, slab
Guanciale
Pancetta
Blood sausage
Mexican chorizo
Italian sausage (spicy or mild)
Pepperoni
Salami
Hot dogs
Spam
Non-aged ham (also called cooked
ham)*
Apply after baking
Prosciutto, Serrano ham, Ibérico ham
Mortadella
Coppa, duck breast prosciutto, speck,
bresaola, lardo
Pastrami
Apply before or after baking
Bacon, sliced
Tasso ham, Spanish cured chorizo
*Ifusing very high-quality ham, add after baking
HOW TO PREPARE
baking; to avoid this, coat the meat with a melting cheese like mozzarella, or place it on the dough after it has baked halfway.
slice thick (6 mm/14 in) and cut into batons to make lardons; render fat out
slice thick (6 mm/14 in) and cut into batons; render fat out
slice thin
cut into lardons
to add before baking, render fat out halfway
to add after baking, render fat out completely and crisp in an oven or sauté pan
remove from casing, pinch pieces onto pizza
cook before topping pizza
cook before topping pizza unless using very small pieces
slice thin
slice thin and julienne
slice thin or thick, depending on desired outcome
slice thin
slice thin and julienne
leave whole (if Vienna sausage size)
slice into 1 cm/3s in pieces
slice into discs
slice thin
slice thick (6 mm/1/4 in) and cut into batons to make lardons; render fat out
cut into 6 mm/14 in dice
slice thin
slice thin and julienne
slice thin and shred by hand
slice thin and tear by hand
slice thin and julienne
slice thin
slice thin and shred by hand
slice thin
slice thin
slice thin and julienne
slice thin and shred by hand
leave whole or cut into small squares, lardons, or julienne
to add before baking, render fat out halfway
to add after baking, render fat out completely and crisp in an oven or sauté pan
slice thin
slice thin and shred by hand
slice thin and julienne
When you slice hot dogs into discs and bake them, their casing
makes them cup like pepperoni (see page 379).
TOPPINGS 377
10
THE PEPPERONI THAT SET THE STANDARD
Pepperoni is an American innovation and is unlike any other sausage in
Italy. It's classified as semicured and fermented for a short while to add
flavor. Some pepperoni is smoked. It's soft, which is part of the reason
it works so well on pizza. Have you ever made your own pepperoni?
Yeah, probably not. And if you did, you might have been disappointed
because it probably didn't taste like what you were expecting. The standard flavor of pepperoni was established not in Italian salumerias but
by large American food-processing companies, notably Hormel Foods,
which started making the ubiquitous red pizza sausage more than 100
years ago (see page 1:52). By 1920, Armour & Company was also cranking
it out using a large-scale automated production process.
Old-fashioned Hormel pepperoni, in particular, is such a standardbearer that other pepperoni can look strange by comparison. When
the website Serious Eats did a taste test, they praised a Hormel offering
(which gets its red color from cherry powder) for its "classic pepperoni
flavor" and declared it the "clear winner" compared to other brands in
the pizza topping category.
Today, an estimated 36 percent of pizzas sold in the United States
have pepperoni on top. It's the number one topping choice in every state
except Hawaii, according to analysis of delivery orders through the app
Slice. Most pizza advertisements show a pepperoni pie. Even back in the
1940s, grocers were advertising their frozen pepperoni pizzas.
Hormel Foods dominates the pepperoni market and owns some of
the smaller brands, too. That's not to say there isn't other good pepperoni. We've tried and enjoyed several brands, and even prefer some of
them to the classic. But in our minds, we have to fight the urge to compare them to the mass-produced stuff.
HORMEL HORMEL
A Hormel Foods delivery truck from 1927 Pepperoni being made at Hormel Foods in the 1930s
IF YOUR PEPPERONI CAN'T TAKE THE HEAT,
IT BETTER GET OUT OF THE KITCHEN!
Thats why we kperen, is perormance underfire that crxunts on onepizza
compepizza oven (6001) for five mirutes Our competitors couldn't take the he d does Every time
Hormel with the wine Hormel ood
BRAND
Hormel
Rosa Grande PEPPERONI
Leep refrigerated
Nutrition tal Fat
T3g
20 Tolal Cart
Facts
When we traveled to Italy, we found an
almost universal staunch opposition
to using pepperoni on pizza. We don't
know why since this partially cured spicy
sausage renders so well, the red oil that it
produces is so delicious, and it acquires
additional flavors when it browns in the
oven. We were also somewhat surprised
by this attitude since there are spicy cured
Italian sausages that have the potential to
work well on pizza. Despite the resistance
to using pepperoni in Italy, we can tell
you that it works beautifully on Neapolitan pizzas, even when it is baked at very
high temperatures.
A Hormel Foodservice ad, from 1988, praising how
its product doesn't cup in the heat of the oven
378
Popular Hormel Foodservice pepperoni product
Although cupping pepperoni is trendy now, it's actually old school. All pepperoni used to have collagen
casings. Manufacturers eventually switched to paper-based casings, and it became such a distant memory that many pizza aficionados think cupping pepperoni is a new trend.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
EXPERIMENT
WHY DOES PEPPERONI CURL?
Cupping pepperoni is all the rage these days. Pizzerias and social media
accounts sing the praises ofthese grease-filled "roni" cups. But why do
some pepperoni slices curl while others don't? We suspected it was the
casing, so we came up with an experiment. We used a pepperoni brand
specifically marketed as "cupping" pepperoni with a collagen-based
casing. We tried heating the pepperoni slices both with and without this
casing and then compared the results to non-cupping pepperoni.
Our hunch about the curling being related to the casing was correct.
When we used a ring cutter to cut away the casing from the cupping
pepperoni, the pepperoni still cupped, but much less so. And when we
heated just the casing ring, it contracted very quickly. Standard noncupping pepperoni didn't cup at all, as expected.
It also turns out that cupping pepperoni always curls toward the
dominant heat source. When we heated the pepperoni using bottom
heat only, the pepperoni curled down. When we subjected it to top heat
only, which is what happens ona pizza since the sauce and cheese the
pepperoni sit on is cold and the oven is hot, the pepperoni cupped up.
To test this further, we stacked two pieces of pepperoni on top of each
other and cooked them with simultaneous bottom and top heat. Lo and
behold, the bottom one cupped down and the top one cupped up.
Differential heating dictates which direction it cups.
We wanted to see if these results would be repeated when we baked
the pepperoni on an actual pizza. We used a ring cutter to cut off about
1.5 mm/0.06 in from the thinly sliced cupping pepperoni discs to
remove the casing. We topped half of a pizza with the uncut cupping
pepperoni and the other half with the casing-free pepperoni. As you
can see in the photos below, the ones without the casing did not cup
as much. We then baked cupping pepperoni alongside store-bought
casing-less pepperoni on a pizza. This shows more than anything the vast
difference between one and the other.
One reason people like cupping pepperoni is that as the fat from
the sausage melts in the oven's heat, it accumulates in the tiny pepperoni cup, forming a delicious pool. Also, the rim of the pepperoni gets
darker because it's unprotected from the direct heat. The rim becomes
crispier than the remainder of the pepperoni, providing a very pleasant
textural contrast.
Cupping pepperoni (left) and non-cupping pepperoni (right)
inhabiting the same pizza.
Cupping pepperoni (left) and cupping pepperoni
without casing (right)
Casing
Filling
Cupping pepperoni
with casing
TOPPINGS
Cupping pepperoni
without casing
Non-cupping pepperoni
10379
10
ITALIAN SAUSAGE
INGREDIENT
TOTAL TIME YIELD
WEIGHT VOLUME SCALING %
Pork shoulder, cut into 5 cm/2 in cubes and
chilled or very cold
1 kg n/a 100
Active 15-20 min/
Inactive 2 h
1.8 kg
Pork fatback, cut into 5 cm/2 in cubes and 300 g
n/a 30
chilled or very cold
Fine salt 20 g 1 Tbsp +134 tsp 2
Sugar 20 g 1 Tbsp + 2/½ tsp 2
Hungarian paprika 17 g 2 Tbsp +11/½ tsp 1.7
Fresh basil, finely minced 17 g 6 Tbsp 1.7
Although we recommend precooking most
sausages, ifyou portion fresh sausage into 2.5
cm/1 in pieces, it should cook through and
the resulting fat will be released into the pizza,
which adds extra flavor.
Fresh oregano, finely minced 17 g 2 Tbsp +2/½ tsp 1.7
Fennel seeds, toasted and ground to a fine powder 11 g 1 Tbsp + 2/½ tsp 1.1
Coriander seeds, toasted and ground to a fine 6g 1 Tbsp + 1 tsp 0.6
powder
Crushed red pepper flakes 2g 11½ tsp 0.2
Black peppercorns, coarsely ground
Ice water
1g 1/4+ 18 tsp 0.1
140 g 1/2 cup + 2 Tbsp 14
PROCEDURE
1 Chill the meat grinder parts, including the
coarse grinder die (1 cm/ 3s in), in ice water
for 1 h. Chill the extruder bowl in the
freezer.
2 Remove the grinder parts from the ice bath,
pat dry, and assemble.
3 Grind the pork shoulder and fatback seраrately through the chilled die into the
chilled bowl.
2
4 Fold the ground meat and fat together, and
grind once more. Keep the forcemeat
chilled.
5 In a bowl, combine the salt, sugar, paprika,
basil, oregano, fennel, coriander, red pepper, and peppercorns.
6 Stir in the ice water.
7 Fold the mixture into the forcemeat.
8 Transfer the forcemeat to a stand mixer
fitted with a paddle attachment. Mix on low
speed to ensure that the water and seasonings are evenly distributed, 2-3 min.
9 Refrigerate the sausage for at least I h before
using.
10 Store for up to 1 wk in refrigeration. Freeze
for up to 3 mo.
4
6
We made this a loose sausage since that is what is
generally used as a pizza topping. You can put this
sausage in a casing, but there's a lot more technique
involved and you'd have to parcook it and slice it
before you could put it on your pizza.
In Chicago, we found that the fresh sausage was frequently seasoned with garlic rather than fennel. Ifyou'd
like to make a garlic variation ofthis sausage, replace the
combined weight ofthe paprika, oregano, fennel, coriander, crushed red pepper, and black peppercorns with
peeled fresh garlic cloves. Add the whole cloves in with
the pork before you grind it.
TOPPINGS
8
381
The popularity of dipping sauces has
grown considerably in recent years.
There has been somewhat of a backlash, however, with many pizzerias
refusing to serve their pizza with a side
of ranch.
You can also finish a pizza with grated
hard cheeses, herbs and spices, or even
toppings like salmon furikake, pork
floss, bonito flakes, or grated bottarga.
FINISHING YOUR PIZZA
Finishing sauces are liquid condiments that can be
drizzled over a baked pizza. Some culinary flavors
are fat soluble so those will always be carried better
by an oil than a water-based liquid. They can be
homemade or commercially prepared, and the
options are endless. Some of our favorites include
sriracha, Maggi sauce, any and every form of hot
sauce, hoisin sauce, teriyaki sauce, barbecue sauce
(see page 267), vinegars in all forms, and flavored
oils. Other highlights include ranch or blue cheese
dressing, chimichurri, yogurt sauce, tapenade,
caponata, or even mustard. We include a wide array
of recipes in our chapter on sauces (see page 259
for those that can be applied after baking, including
Aioli and Sous Vide Hollandaise). The sky is truly
the limit in terms of the flavors that you can add to
your pizzas. Shop your local markets or scour the
internet to find interesting condiments to add to
your flavor profiles.
FLAVORED OILS
We recommend applying these to the pizza after baking since the flavor is more pronounced, but you can add before baking if you prefer.
Flavored oil
Boquerones or
anchovy oil
Butter or ghee
Ingredients Scaling %
Boquerones or 100
anchovies in oil
(canned)
Butter or ghee 100
Calabrian or 20
Szechuan chilis
Vegetable oil 100
Chorizo oil Spanish cured 100
chorizo
Chili oil
Curry-infused oil Curry mix of your 5
choice
Vegetable oil 100
Saffron-infused oil Saffron threads 0.1
Vegetable oil 100
Notes
Drain the boquerones or anchovies and reserve both the oil and fish in
refrigeration.
Use purchased as is, or infuse with a variety of flavors. Citrus zest, herbs, or spices
are common additions.
Toast the chilis (they can be whole or crushed) in a sauté pan over medium-high
heat. Stir frequently so they get completely toasted throughout. Once aromatic,
add the oil and bring the oil up to 150°C/300° F. Turn off the heat and cool to room
temperature before using. Straining is optional.
Render the fat out of the chorizo by cutting it into small dice and then cooking it
in a hot sauté pan. Once the fat has leached from the chorizo and the chorizo has
browned, take the pan off the heat. Drain the resulting fat and reserve it warm for
service so it stays fluid. Otherwise, refrigerate. Use the cooked chorizo as a topping
for pizza.
Toast the curry spices in a sauté pan over medium-high heat, stirring constantly.
Once aromatic, add the oil and bring the oil up to 150° C/300° F. Turn off the heat
and cool to room temperature before using. If using whole spices, strain out the
spices. If using a curry spice powder, it's not worth straining.
Combine the ingredients in a pot and bring up to 150°C/300° F over mediumhigh heat. Turn offthe heat and cool to room temperature before using. Straining
is optional.
Some oils are flavorful enough to use
on their own. Extra-virgin olive oil is the
most commonly used, especially on
Neapolitan pizza. Argan oil; hazelnut,
macadamia, and pistachio oils; pumpkin seed oil; toasted sesame oil, and
truffle oil all work well as finishing oils
for pizzas.
The chili oil that is being drizzled on this
pizza adds both spiciness and flavor to the
finished pizza.
382 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
THE STATE OF OLIVE OIL
In horticultural terms, olives are the fruit of the olive tree, which makes
olive oil a kind of fruit juice. But the juice of this fruit isn't a sweet syrup;
it's a pleasantly fruity fat.
After harvesting, the olives are washed and crushed into a paste.
The paste is mechanically mixed and then centrifuged to separate the
solids from the liquids. The liquids are further processed to separate
water from oil.
The oil's flavor can vary depending on the type of olive, where the
olives are grown, how long they mature on the tree before harvesting,
how long they sit before processing, and the way they're processed.
Olive oils come in different grades. Under international standards,
"virgin" olive oils are processed mechanically (as opposed to chemically); oils labeled "extra-virgin" are expected to have fewer flavor
defects than those that simply have the "virgin" designation. Refined
olive oil, also called "pure olive oil," "light olive oil," or just plain "olive
oil," goes through additional processing that can include heat and
chemicals. The processing is designed to overcome flaws in the olives
themselves or those caused by poor handling, but it winds up removing
desirable flavors as well. For that reason, it's often mixed with stronger
oils to return some of that flavor.
Various governing bodies, including the International Olive Council
and the Olive Oil Commission of California, have defined parameters
for the different types of oils-for example, the maximum percentage of
free fatty acids they may contain-but those standards vary from region to
region. And they're not always followed, anyway. As it turns out, even if it
says "extra-virgin" or "Italian" on the label, that might not be what's in the
bottle. In a study by the University of California-Davis, nearly threequarters of samples obtained from bottles of top-selling brands failed to
meet international standards for flavor and aroma. Those flaws, which
included rancidity, were an indicator that oils were oxidized, adulterated
with cheaper oils, improperly processed, or made with poor-quality or
damaged olives. Many samples failed chemical tests, too. The findings
were in keeping with other research that found rampant problems,
including outright fraud, in olive oil production and labeling.
So how do you know if you're buying a good olive oil? One simple
step is to check the harvest, production, and bottling dates. The shorter
the time between each of the steps, the better. Also, if the oil is more
than two years old, don't bother. Small bottles are better if you're not
going to finish a large bottle within two years. Store away from light, at
under 27° C/80°F. Producers, grocers, and importers can also employ
testing companies, like Agbiolab in California, to assess key attributes,
such as ultraviolet absorbency (an indicator of secondary oxidation),
peroxide value (an indicator of improper handling), and free acidity (an
indicator of poor fruit quality or improper handling).
These olive trees at Olivastri Millenari in Sardinia, Italy, have lived for thousands of years. The oldest is said to be 3,000 years old.
TOPPINGS 383
10
CHAPTER 11
BAKING PIZZA
TRANSFERRING YOUR DOUGH 388
TRANSFORMING DOUGH
INTO PIZZA 392
PIZZA BAKING METHODS 395
BAKING PIZZA
You'll find that understanding the basic science of
how baking works makes the practice of baking your
pizza easier and more interesting (see The Physics
of Dough and Sauce, page 1:362). After all, turning
dough into a successful pizza is the result of a series
of steps: properly proofing the dough, stretching it
to the right thickness, and safely transferring it to a
hot oven (hopefully one that's well-suited to your
specific pizza style) to bake.
When you bake a pizza, heat energy moves from
the oven into the dough mixture, transforming it.
The water in the dough boils into steam, which further inflates bubbles created by the carbon dioxide
and ethanol released by yeast during fermentation
and causes the final "oven spring" of the rising
process. In the interior crumb, proteins unravel in
the heat and stick together to form a stretchy web.
On the surface, starch heated in the presence of
water gels, and then the starch gel can solidify, which
is called a starch "glass." This crisp state of starch is
what's responsible for crispiness in everything from
potato chips to pizza crust.
It's also important to understand the fundamentals of the way that your oven works when it bakes a
pizza. Thin-crust and medium-crust pizzas, such as
thin-crust or Brazilian thin-crust pizza, Neapolitan
pizza, and New York pizza, are baked with infrared
light, especially in the case of a wood-burning pizza
oven (see page 1:357). The heat in these types
of ovens is asymmetric (and the temperature is
typically very high), so pizzaioli have to contend
with moving the pizzas around the oven to bake
them evenly. The top is baked almost entirely by
radiation-the air temp does not make much contribution. That's not true in a combi, home, impinger,
or convection oven where the air temperature is a
primary heat transfer mechanism.
When it comes to ovens that are used at lower
temperatures, like deck ovens, the temperature of
the air plays a more important role. And it's key to
note that the bottom of the pizza is always baked
by conduction, whether the pizza sits directly on
the oven floor or it's in a pan. The top is baked
by radiation (broiled, if you will)-this is true for
all types of ovens except for combi, home, and
convection ovens. This means that when you cook
in a home oven, you have a problem and you need to
improvise (see page 1:393).
Choosing an oven for baking your pizza can
have serious implications because the capabilities
of the oven determine to a great extent the kinds
and quality of the pizzas you can bake in it. The
oven is the primary difference between a home
maker and a pizzeria for some kinds of pizza. (It
depends on the kind of pizza though. There are
types where there really isn't a difference.) The
fundamental problem is that many ofthe ovens
we use don't give you what you need. A good
oven will have a steady source of heat and recover
quickly after it's loaded (see page 1:375). Some
ovens, such as impinger or deck ovens, work well
for a variety of different pizza styles. Others, such
as wood-fired ovens, are specialized. Home ovens,
meanwhile, are just plain difficult to work around.
Not to worry, though. Your pizza isn't going to
jump out ofthe oven in protest if you don't have
the right kind. A little bit of finessing and hacking
will make your results even better than expected.
In our chapter on the science of baking and
pizza ovens on page 1:345, we cover how each oven
functions in detail. This chapter will give you the
practical know-how to confidently bake your pizza.
We'll break down the methods for loading each
different style of pizza into the oven so that your
pizza doesn't stick to your peel and spoil the work
that you put in up to that point. We'll share detailed
methods for how to bake pizza in a wide variety of
ovens and explain which styles work best in each
oven. We'll also give you the tools to make pizza in
unconventional ovens such as a grill, a fryer, or a
portable oven. Many readers might not have professional pizza ovens at their disposal, but we'll show
you ways to make the most out of the oven you have.
We strongly believe that a good pizzaiolo can make
delicious pizza in any oven.
NEW DISCOVERIES AND TECHNIQUES
The best method for loading your style of pizza (see page 390)
Determining which styles of pizza work best in certain ovens (see page 395)
Unconventional cooking methods including the shallow fryer (see page 418)
and stove top methods (see page 412)
Baking pizzas in portable ovens (see page 416)
Even with a really great oven, you'll
need to rotate your pizza at least once
(or many times with Neapolitan pizzas).
Rotating helps prevent the bottom
from scorching and is the secret to even
baking.
For more on the specific mechanics of how
ovens work, see page 1:346.
We always fully prebake our al taglio pizzas
(see photo, previous page),either with or
without sauce. Prebaking (see page 419) helps
to mitigate the formation of a gel layer.
387
11
Pizza screen
TRANSFERRING YOUR DOUGH
You're ready to bake a pizza. This is the moment
when everything you've done beforehand will pay
off... if you can actually get the pizza into the oven
without incident. Pan-baked pizzas proof in the pans
they bake in, making transferring them into the oven
very easy. We cover the transferring and baking steps
for pan-baked pizzas on page 409 of this chapter.
Doughs that are proofed in a ball and require shaping before baking are more of a challenge.
Once the dough ball has been shaped, sauced,
and topped, your mission is to get that pizza into
the oven without distorting the shape or losing
toppings to the oven floor. If you're too aggressive,
you risk knocking toppings out of place. If you're
too hesitant, the dough might not even slide off the
peel. You'll need to handle the dough gently but
with confidence.
Chris Bianco (see page 1:267) removes this marinara pizza with a metal peel that is commonly used with wood-fired or
gas-fired pizza ovens.When making Neapolitan pizzas in these ovens, pizzaioli usually use a wooden peel to load the
pizza and a smaller metal peel to spin the pizza while it bakes and to take the pizza out of the oven.
388 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PIZZA SCREENS
Although not as commonly used as peels in
pizzerias, pizza screens consist of a fine wire
mesh surrounded by a metal ring. They come in a
number of different diameters, from 20 cm/ 8 in
to 60 cm / 24 in. Depending on your perspective,
using a screen is either a godsend or it's cheating.
Screens are useful if you don't have experience
making pizza, because you can consistently shape a
round pizza that is the exact size that you need. We
find screens useful for certain styles of pizza and
types of ovens.
We always spray the screens with oil just before
placing the dough on top, then apply the sauce,
cheese, and toppings as needed. The screen makes it
easy to move the pizza from worktable to oven. It's
extremely practical for impinger ovens since all you
have to do is place the pizza-loaded screen onto the
conveyor belt and walk away. (Depositing a pizza
directly on a conveyor belt without losing its shape
is a challenge, to say the least.) Since impinger ovens
blow hot air from above and below, the screen allows
the heat to pass through easily. For home pizza makers, it also helps to assemble the pizza on the screen
and then place it on a baking steel or stone so that
you don't have to worry about the pizza sticking to a
peel when you are loading it into the oven.
Large screens also make it easier to handle bigger
pizzas, which often need extra attention to crisp
up on the bottom. After about 2 minutes of baking
the pizza on the screen, we slide a thin metal peel
between the screen and pizza and move the pizza
to a new hot spot in the oven. This eliminates any
possibility of a soft or underbaked bottom crust.
PEELS
For doughs baked without pans, peels are indispensable. They come in many different paddle sizes,
lengths, and materials (wood, metal, and cloth).
Some other kitchen tools can be used in a pinch.
The purpose, of course, is to transport the dough
from point A to point B without damaging anything.
This simple operation will take some finesse.
Hesitation won't get you there. Nor will working
too slowly. Even being excessively careful can be
a detriment. Gentle but assertive motions-and
practice-are key.
Note that peels are mostly necessary for pizzas that
are baked directly on a hot surface (the oven floor or
a baking stone or steel). For pan-baked pizzas,you can push the pan around in the oven with a peel, but it
won't work for pulling it out. For that, use oven mitts,
clean kitchen towels, or baking pan grippers or pliers.
Wooden Peels
The earliest peels were made of wood, and some
traditionalists still prefer wooden peels over metal.
Wooden peels are generally thicker than metal, and
that thickness presents some challenges. It means
the pizza has a longer distance to drop from peel
to oven floor, and using a wooden peel requires a
lot more skill than a metal one. Wooden peels also
tend to split and splinter after heavy use. If tradition
is more important than efficiency, you may prefer
a wooden peel, but otherwise, we don't see a good
argument in favor of using it.
Wooden peel
Mini Loading Peel
These peels, also known as loaders in bread-baking
vernacular, aren't practical for large-scale use, but the
smaller versions can make the home pizza maker's
life a whole lot easier. The dough is shaped and
placed on the loader, then sauced, cheesed, and
topped. There's a rolling cloth mechanism that allows
you to slowly and gently drop the pizza onto the hot
baking steel or stone with minimal effort.
Metal Peels
Metal peels are typically made of stainless steel or
aluminum and come in a variety of shapes and sizes
to fit almost any kind of pizza or oven. One of the
simplest but greatest improvements on the original
solid metal peels is the perforated peel, which has
two benefits. The perforations reduce the chances
the dough will stick, making it easier to release the
dough into the oven. The holes also let excess flour
fall off before reaching the oven floor, where it might
burn onto the dough. Metal peels tend to be much
lighter and thinner than wood, so there won't be a big
jolt as the pizza drops from peel to oven floor. This
can make a difference to someone manning the oven
all day. You'll need to work quickly if you are dressing
the pizza on a metal peel because the dough has a
tendency to stick more to metal than to wood. If you
dress the pizza on a perforated metal peel, there is
a chance that the dough will press into the holes, so
you can't press too hard when shaping the dough.
If you're making Neapolitan pizzas, you'll likely
need two different peels: a 30 cm / 12 in peel to load
the pizza into the oven, and a much smaller peel, also
known as a turning peel, to spin the pizza around
on the oven floor to help it bake evenly and prevent
scorching.
Improvised Peels
Most flat, thin surfaces can work as an improvised
peel, so long as they're large enough to fit the whole
pizza (with a little wiggle room if possible). They
should be thin enough to prevent the pizza from
having a big drop-off when it's slid onto the baking
surface. An upside-down half sheet pan, a piece of
sturdy cardboard, or a large cake board can work.
An upside-down sheet pan can be used in combination with parchment paper.
Pizzaioli generally use peels made from either
wood or metal, depending on their preference
and the style of pizza they are making. These
peels come in a number of shapes and sizes;
some metal peels are perforated (we prefer
these). If you don't have a peel at home, you
can flip a sheet pan upside down and use it to
load pizzas into your oven (putting a piece of
parchment paper on top makes it even easier).
Improvised peel
Metal peels
11
Mini loading peel
BAKING PIZZA
HOW TO Transfer Pizza Dough Using a Peel
There are five methods for transferring floor-baked pizza dough into any
oven, each requiring a peel or a stand-in. They all hinge on ajerk-back motion, which requires some practice. You have to be quick, otherwise
the dough might stick to the peel. When you use a peel, finish the
transfer by following the three steps for loading floor-baked pizzas
into the oven.
OUR PREFERRED METHOD FOR THIN-CRUST, BRAZILIAN THIN-CRUST, NEW YORK, AND ARTISAN PIZZA
1 Place the peel close to the assembled
pizza; make sure it's steady and will stay in
place.
2 Slide the peel under the pizza in a quickjerk-back-and-forth motion (inertia is your
friend). Reshape as needed.
3
Slide the pizza into the oven.
OUR PREFERRED METHOD FOR NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
1
Place the peel close to the assembled
pizza; make sure it's steady and will stay in
place.
2
Slide the pizza onto the peel with your
hands. Reshape as needed.
3 Slide the pizza into the oven.
OUR PREFERRED METHOD FOR LOADING PIZZAS ASSEMBLED ON A PEEL
2
1 Flour your metal or wooden peel.
2 Shape the dough on a generously floured
surface and then place it on the floured
peel (you can use less flour as you gain
experience). Reshape as needed.
390
За 3Ь
3 Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings. Do this
as quickly as possible; the longer this takes,
the higher the chances the dough will stick
to the peel (the dough can also stick if you
press too hard while assembling the pizza).
4
Slide the pizza into the oven.
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
OUR PREFERRED METHOD FOR IMPINGER OVENS OR DOUGHS BAKED ON SCREENS
1
4
Coat a pizza screen with a light layer of
cooking spray.
2 Shape the dough on a generously floured
surface and then place it on the screen.
Reshape as needed.
3 Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings.
4 Slide the pizza into the oven with the
screen.
TRANSFERRING FLOOR-BAKED PIZZAS WITH PARCHMENT PAPER
1 Shape your dough and place it on the
parchment paper. Apply sauce, cheese,
and toppings.
Cut your parchment paper slightly larger than your
pizza. For a 30 cm/12 in or 35 cm/14 in pizza, cut a
38 cm/15 in round or square piece.
2 Transfer the pizza onto a peel or the
back of an upside-down sheet pan or
cookie sheet
This method is meant to be used for pizzas baked in
a home oven, either on a baking stone or a baking
steel. Do not use this method for Neapolitan pizzas
because they are baked at high temperatures and
the parchment paper can burn in a wood-fired oven.
3 Slide the pizza into the oven.
LOADING FLOOR-BAKED PIZZAS INTO THE OVEN
1 Position the peel where you want the pizza
to go in the oven.
2 Tilt the handle of the peel up only a few
degrees.
BAKING PIZZA
3 Pull the peel back in a series of quickjerkback motions. These quick motions use
inertia to make the dough slide off. It may
take several jerked-back-and-forth
motions to fully release the pizza, especially if it's large.
391
11
Alveoli are the small holes, or air
pockets, in a pizza's crumb. They are
first formed during mixing and expand
during fermentation and baking.
The increase in size in the crust is called
oven spring by bread bakers.
TRANSFORMING DOUGH INTO PIZZA
High heat is the main element required to convert
dough into pizza crust, with different phenomena
occurring as the dough's temperature rises. During
baking, yeasts start to die off at 50-60°C/122-
140°F. Enzymes, the compounds that unleash the
process of gluten formation and fermentation, will
also be rendered inactive once the dough reaches
this temperature. As water in the dough vaporizes,
the bubbles within expand because of heat and
accelerated fermentation, increasing in size until
they burst. This steam is what inflates the pizza. It
transforms the millions of bubbles within the dough
into a few interconnected ones.
As the water evaporates during baking, it also
contributes to the dough's expansion. Pan-baked
pizzas can even double in size. In stretched doughs
baked directly on the oven floor, the expansion
occurs mostly in the rim (see page 1:362).
The two phenomena controlling crumb formation are the coagulation of the proteins and the
gelatinization of the starches. Protein coagulation
involves the irreversible bonding of the proteins
to form a solid network. Gelatinization means
that the starch has gotten hot enough to form a set
gel. Between 55 and 65°C / 131 and 149° F, starch
granules begin to swell with water, which migrates
from the proteins, and the amylose within the
starch starts seeping out. Gas expansion increases
the pressure within the dough, forcing the bubbles
to coalesce. This pressure is partly responsible for
determining the structure of the crumb and the
alveolar pattern.
The temperature at which protein coagulation
and starch gelatinization are complete depends
on the type of flour used and the hydration of the
dough; for doughs made with bread flour, this
temperature is 60°C / 140°F. Doughs that contain
a large proportion of rye flour and/or a low percentage of water may not undergo complete starch
gelatinization until 90°C / 194°F. This is because
there's less conductivity in denser doughs; therefore,
gelatinization and coagulation take more time, and
such doughs may require lower baking temperatures
to avoid burning the crust.
Our highest-hydration pizzas are all thick crusted,
or bread-like, so they take longer to bake. In general,
these doughs are baked at lower temperatures than
thin-crust pizzas because higher temperatures would
lead to scorching. The longer baking times also
mean that in many professional settings most of the
bread-like pizzas are prebaked (see page 419) and
then reheated (with the exception of Detroit-style
pizzas; see page 3:109). This way, the customer
can get their pizza faster. Also, a lot of these styles
are sold by the slice because they can be quickly
reheated or finished and served. The increased
moisture in the crusts also means that they reheat
very well without drying out too much. Doughs that
have oil as an ingredient retain moisture in the crust
and crumb and reheat better.
The type and temperature of the oven also influence the rate at which heat flows into the dough.
The rim of a medium-crust pizza can be baked at
a higher temperature because the heat transfer
Near the beginning of the bake, the dough lies flush on the oven floor. Oven
spring causes a visible lift; when fully baked (see right side of photo), the
bottom contracts and springs up to form an angle with the floor. This is
followed soon after by bubbles trapped within the gluten network expanding
and bursting. The starches and proteins set to form the crumb and crust
before the crust darkens.
The dough is fully baked at this point, but
the crust is not browned properly. This
particular dough is proofed for 2 days, SO
you'll notice some blistering due to the
long fermentation.
happens quickly enough that the interior cooks
through before the surface burns. The extreme
version of this is a Neapolitan pizza, which can bake
in as little as 60-90 seconds.
Crust formation occurs early on, and the surface
of the dough begins to take on color as the bake progresses, becoming darker and darker. By the time the
core temperature reaches between 91 and 93°C /
195 and 200° F, the crumb structure is set, but the
color of the crust should be the determining factor in
when to remove it from the oven.
The texture of the baked crust willvary depending on the style. Most pizzas that are baked on the
oven floor are firmer and able to hold a plank pretty
well if they are properly baked and aren't overloaded
with toppings. Neapolitan pizza is an exception,
however. It's baked at higher temperatures than
our other styles, but it's only in the oven for 60-90
seconds, so it doesn't have enough time to form a
crispy crust. These pizzas have a serious case of tip
sag (see page 6), but that's intentional. Crispiness
and the ability to hold a plank are made possible by
moisture evaporation during baking. The 90-second
bake for a Neapolitan pizza is generally not long
enough to evaporate moisture and lend structural
strength to the dough. Pan-baked pizzas rarely sag
unless the dough is very soft or underbaked. They're
thick to begin with and can therefore support more
weight on top.
GEL LAYER FORMATION
Different styles of pizza have different properties
of their under crust, too. Some styles suffer from a
significant gel layer or gum line (see page 1:370).
This happens when the sauce and cheese unknowingly conspire to keep the dough underneath from
baking properly. The sauce (and, to a lesser extent,
the cheese) creates a moisture barrier between the
hot air in the oven and the surface of the dough,
leaving the covered part of the dough gummy. It can
happen in thin-crust pizza, too, but you'll notice it
less-the thicker the pizza, the thicker the gum line
seems to be. To remedy or reduce gumminess, you
can place the cheese on first and variegate it with the
sauce (see page 207). For some bread-like pizzas,
you can prebake the dough completely, turn it over
in the pan, and then apply sauce and cheese and
bake it again, as we do with our New York Square
Pizza (see page 3:133). It's an extra step that not
everyone wants to take, but it will completely eliminate the gel layer.
Deep-dish pizza suffers from a similar fate
because the under crust is submerged in wet stuff;
in this case even prebaking the crust doesn't completely solve the problem. Although you should
wait a few minutes after taking it out of the oven
before you eat it (see page 3:295),you'll still need
to manage your expectations because the crust
won't be very crisp. This lack of crispiness isn't as
noticeable in deep-dish pizza, though, because you
have very little dough when you compare it to the
amount of toppings in the pizza. Since the dough
has a lower hydration than many others, it doesn't
tend to feel as gummy as thicker, higher-hydration
pizza doughs.
When the pizza crust's surface temperature exceeds roughly 130°C/265°F,
Maillard reactions start to occur rapidly.
Sugars react chemically with amino
acids and other protein fragments to
produce brown pigments, complex
flavor compounds, and a stiff, brittle
surface-all crucial elements in the
majority of pizza crusts. The notable
exception to this is the Neapolitan
pizza, which has a soft crust.
This compilation of time lapse photos illustrates how this artisan pizza changes during
baking. Oven spring increases the volume of
the pizza dough during the early stages of
baking and the crust goes from pale white to
a rich mahogany brown.
Maillard reactions are in full force, browning the crust and producing
characteristic flavors and hundreds of aromatic compounds in the
dough, sauce, and cheese that combine to give fresh pizza an irresistible smell. How does the flour sprinkled on top of this loaf remain
white even when the crust has nicely browned? Maillard reactions
are driven in large part by sugars, and those sugars are broken down
from starches in the flour during mixing and fermentation. Raw flour
has a much lower sugar content and thus browns at a much higher
temperature than dough does.
11
PIZZA BAKING METHODS
Not every oven is good for every type of pizza (see
our recommendations in the Pizza Ovens chapter,
page 1:345). The pizza deck oven is the most versatile and is recommended for all of our styles except
Neapolitan. The wood-burning oven is the hardest
to use; you can get a superior result only if you're
really skilled. We found an interesting correlation
between the number of skilled minutes you spend
making the dough and baking it: Neapolitan pizza
dough is among the easiest to make but requires
the highest degree of baking skills, while al taglio
pizza has dough that is harder to handle but easier to
shape and bake. If the idea of a traditional-looking
domed pizza oven appeals to you, consider a gasfired version, which is easier to use and produces
more consistent temperatures (see page 1:356).
Forced-air convection ovens are less than ideal
for most (if not all) pizzas because the hot circulating air sets the crust too quickly, and the volume
takes a hit. We recommend turning the fan down
as much as possible. Another problem is they don't
have a floor that can radiate heat directly into the
pizza or its baking pan. To get a crispy bottom
crust, we recommend using a baking steel or
baking stone.
If you're a home pizza maker, the only thing
standing between you and pizza greatness is your
oven. We provide a few solutions and work-arounds,
but know that ifyour intent is to bake Neapolitan
pizza, you're not going to get true Naples-style
results in a home oven. It just doesn't have enough
juice to reach the super-high temperatures you need.
However, there are some appliances that can do that
and some small outdoor units that can get ripping
hot (see page 1:394).
When you remove a pizza from the oven, the spot
where it baked will be cooler than the rest of the
oven floor. The oven needs time to recover its temperature. Keep a visual map of where you've been,
where you are, and where you're going next (see
page 1:385). It helps to follow a pattern. Assign each
corner a number and keep it that way; eventually it
will become second nature. Similarly, watch for hot
spots in your oven (see page 1:385).
Pizzas baked directly on the oven floor will also
need to be tended and rotated. If you're baking in
a home oven, we highly recommend using a baking
steel or stone in combination with the broiler for
the best results. We also recommend using a baking
steel or stone in combi or convection ovens to get a
crispy bottom. In the following pages, we'll provide
additional practical tips to get the best pizza out of
each type of oven, as well as a list of styles that are
recommended for each oven type. We also have a set
of how-tos for some alternative ways to make a pizza,
such as grilling and frying.
For more on pizza ovens, see the Pizza Ovens
chapter starting on page 1:345.
The baking stone shown on the grill below
is a valuable tool you can use at home to try
to re-create the even heat of the hearth of a
wood-fired oven with gas assist (shown on the
previous page). The baking stone won't make
an exact replica of the margherita pizza being
baked on the brick hearth because it can't get
to the same high temperatures (but it'llstill be
delicious).
BAKING PIZZA 395
11
EXPERIMENT
DOES ANY ONE FACTOR MATTER WHEN BAKING PIZZA?
We work with living dough when we make pizza, which translates to
differences in the baked end result. But does it differ from pizza to pizza
as much as we think? Variation is intrinsic to any recipe. As a matter of
fact, the innate variations in quality of ingredients, human handling, the
"living" fermentation process (especially for doughs containing levain),
and the temperature can all vary from day to day. When we achieve a
superior result in a certain set of circumstances, this naturally (and erroneously) leads us to believe that we have to maintain this routine in order
to make great pizza every time. How can we avoid this pitfall?
In regulated scientific environments, processes are repeated tens to
hundreds of times to assess the process variation leading to a product's
quality attributes. This allows for the establishment of a statistical range
of variation for different criteria that would characterize the product.
Once a range is established, a product's critical quality attributes (CQAs)
would require any newly made batch to either be in range of the statistical variation, or to be dismissed for failing the quality criteria. In other
words, a product would be considered different from the desired result if
it falls outside the range of the established statistical variation.
When comparing baking techniques and conditions, our goal is to
determine if the difference that we see is statistically significant. We
did this by measuring volume in our bread-like pizzas that have highhydration ranges (70-87hydration). The expected variation in these
thicker doughs will be higher than that of lower-hydration dough, which
doesn't rise as much, so its variation will be smaller and its volume more
undeviating. Although volume isn't the only factor in determining pizza
quality, it is one that is easy to objectively measure, unlike taste (see How
to Set Up the Triangle Test on page 9). And volume is a key quality attribute that pizza makers look forin pizza.
We started the experiment with focaccia. We prepared 20 versions
of the master recipe in four batches over the course of 4 days. Each
batch resulted in five pizzas baked at the same time. The focaccias were
stippled by a custom-prepared stippler to remove the element of human
hands causing variation. We established our standard deviation based on
the resulting volume measurements and then repeated this procedure
for New York square, al taglio, and Detroit-style pizzas to obtain their
volume ranges. Three standard deviations would cover 99% of "control"
pizzas-pizzas prepared according to our master recipe at the Modernist
Cuisine facility by our chefs; two standard deviations would cover 95%.
The percent standard deviation (called CV for Coefficient of Variation) is
defined as standard deviation divided by mean value and multiplied by
100: % Relative Std Dev (CV) = STDx100/Mean.
The photos at left show the volumes of five focaccias baked on the
first day, and equally divided in six slices using a ruler. The first focaccia
is a good illustration of the concept of slice to slice variation. It has a
very thin first slice and a much thicker last slice, which is quantitatively
confirmed by the volume measurements (the smaller slice has a volume of 501.94 cm³ and the bigger slice has a volume of 857.61 cm³). The
difference between the two slices is as high as 52%. Even within the same
pizza, the slices can vary so much that it looks like they came from two
different pieces of baked dough.
With open-crumb crusts, there's natural variation from one pizza to
the next, and you can usually mitigate any differences with experience
and pizza-making techniques. With all their efforts to be consistent, a
working pizzeria will always provide products that vary day to day and,
within the same day, from batch to batch. If making a change to your
ingredients or technique results in a pizza that falls within the standard
deviation range, then that change is producing virtually the same pizza
and doesn't need to be made. We think this is probably why there are
some amazingly complicated dough recipes, but it's very hard to believe
those things actually matter.
Different slices from the same focaccia
396 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
SOME LIKE IT HOT
The temperature of a wood-fired oven can get up to a blistering 425-
480°C/800-900°F, which is well-suited for baking Neapolitan pizzas.
We bake other pizza styles at a more modest 245-285°C/ 475-550° F.
Of course, the temperature of the pizza itself doesn't get close to those
baking temperatures (unless they are burnt). You might be surprised to
learn what happens to other materials at similar temperatures. For example, a Neapolitan pizza bakes at temperatures hotter than molten lead.
The daytime surface
temperature of Venus
New York pizza bakes
1,400-1,600° C 2.552-2.912° F
1,400° C 2,552° F
Candle flame burns 600°C 1.220°F
Aluminum melts
427° C 801° F
425-480°C 800-900°F
328°C 622°F
288° C 550°F
Lead melts
282-480° C 540-900°F
243° C 470°F
The smoke point of olive oil 233° C 451° F
180-205° C 356-401° F Paper burns
RAY BRADBURY Coffee beans are roasted 83-100°C 182-212°F
FAHRENHEIT 451
If you need help
remembering the
temperature at which
paper burns, think of
the Ray Bradbury novel
Fahrenheit 451.
71°C S
160°F
60-99°C 155-211° F
Third-degree burns occur in less than
a second.
The temperature of the middle of
a pizza (across all styles) when it
comes out of the oven
Glass melts
Neapolitan pizza bakes
Wood ignites, but it burns
much hotter at 704-871°C/
1,300-1,600°F.
Pizza crust temperature (across all
styles) when it comes out of the
oven
397
11
DONE VERSUS OVERDONE
You've probably seen mouthwatering pictures of pizza your entire life.
You can imagine the perfect slice of New York pizza, glistening with
slightly charred pepperoni and a golden-brown rim ready to be folded
and eaten as you walk down the street. In real life, you've probably also
seen some pale pizza with an underdone gummy crust. Or, in the other
direction, a burnt crust and toppings.
When it comes to doneness, there are different schools of thought,
depending largely on the preference of the pizzaiolo. Many pizza makers
prefer a golden-brown pizza while others like to bake their pizzas a little
darker, especially in the cases of Neapolitan or artisan pizzas (although
we found some styles, like New Haven pizza, to be burnt the majority of
the time; see page 1:97).
We want to be clear that there is a difference between pizzas that
are dark brown (this is called bien cuit in bread circles) and pizzas that
are burnt. The leoparded spots that you see on Neapolitan pizzas are
scattered across the surface of just-baked dough (see page 1:366). You'll
get contrasting textures and flavors in these crusts. When you see crusts
where the majority of the surface is black and carbonized, the crust will
taste acrid with off-flavors (burnt foods have also been linked to carcinogens). We're all for serving a pizza with a crispy crust, but it shouldn't
be burnt.
These photos show you the baking gradient for nine of our master
pizza doughs so that you can see what each crust looks like from underdone to brown to slightly charred to burnt; what the cheese looks like
when it's properly melted (and possibly browned); and what the sauce
looks like when it is too wet, the perfect consistency, and overdone.
398
THIN-CRUST PIZZA NEAPOLITAN PIZZA
underdone / properly baked/ overbaked
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
NEW YORK PIZZA
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
ARTISAN PIZZA
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
FOCACCIA
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
DETROIT-STYLE PIZZA
AL TAGLIO PIZZA
(after baking, before topping)
NEW YORK SQUARE
(prebaked bottom)
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
BAKING PIZZA
DEEP-DISH PIZZA
underdone / properly baked / overbaked
399
11
COMMON PIZZA BAKING PROBLEMS
Multiple factors can impact pizza as it bakes. Your dough, sauce, and
cheese are all baking at different rates (see The Pizzaiolo Equation,
page 1:372). You have to contend with oven temperature recovery and
FIXABLE
Problem
The pizza has a soupy center.
There is unmelted cheese on the pizza.
The crumb of the crust is gummy.
Baking is taking longer than normal.
The top of the pizza is underdone.
Solution
monitoring your pizza to ensure even baking. We outline some key problems below, along with solutions.
Bake the pizza for a little longer or at a lower temperature. You could also use a thicker sauce or less
of it. Try precooking toppings like mushrooms that release a lot of water during cooking.
Temper your ingredients so everything bakes at the same rate. The pizza might be too densely
topped.The oven temperature may be too low. You might need to bake the pizza longer if the
crust is pale too.
Try baking the pizza for longer. If it's only slightly gummy, place it near the mouth of the oven, where
it is cooler, to finish baking.
Let your oven recover between baking in certain spots.
If the rest of the pizza is baked, lift the pizza off the floor with a peel and raise it toward the top heat
of the oven (this is generally done with Neapolitan pizzas). You can also torch the top of the pizza
with a heat gun if top heat is not available in your oven.
Soupy center Pizza is underdone
Gummy crumb
400 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Slow baking
Undermelted cheese
WHAT TO DO NEXT TIME
Problem
The pizza is burnt on the bottom.
The pizza is burnt on one side.
There are burnt ingredients on the pizza.
Flour is caking or burnt in spots on the
bottom ofthe pizza.
Solution
The pizza is getting too much heat from the bottom. You could lower the temperature of the floor
of the oven if that's an option. You can also lift the pizza up on the peel briefly to keep it from burning or move it to the mouth of the oven, where it's cooler (this generally applies just to Neapolitan
pizza).
Rotate the pizza as it's baking.
Try assembling the pizza differently so that delicate ingredients are protected from the heat by
sauce or cheese. You can also add those toppings after the pizza is baked. If the crust is also burnt,
lower the oven temperature.
There's too much flour on the dough before you load it in the oven. If you're using semolina to dust
your peel, sweep the soot off the oven floor because semolina tends to burn.
Burnt on the bottom Burnt on one side
Burnt ingredients
BAKING PIZZA
Caked/burnt flour
401
11
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Pizza Deck Oven
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, deep-dish, New York,artisan, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, Detroit-style
2 4
1 Set the oven temperature and open the
vent halfway. If you have both a top and
bottom thermostat, set them to the same
temperature. If you have a temperature
distribution button, see the Strategies for
Pizza Ovens on page 1:380 for specific
protocols.
2 Shape the pizza dough and apply sauce,
cheese, and toppings (see page 3:3).
3 Load the pizza in the oven (see page 390).
If baking more than one pizza at a time,
always place the first pizza in the back of
the deck floor, then the second one next
to it.
4
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Bread Deck Oven
Set the timer and bake for the recommended time. Rotate the pizza as
instructed in the recipe. The lower the
baking temperature, the less frequently
you have to rotate it. Most pan-baked
pizzas require rotating only once, 180°.
For oven-floor-baked pizzas, depending
on the size, rotate once or up to 4 times
(rotate 90° each time).
5 Remove the pizza from the oven with a
peel.
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, deep-dish, New York, artisan, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, Detroit-style
2
1 Set the oven temperature. If you have both
a top and bottom thermostat, set them to
the same temperature.
2 Shape the pizza dough (as needed) and
apply sauce, cheese, and toppings (see
page 3:3).
4
3 Load the pizza in the oven (see page 390). If
baking more than one pizza at a time,
always place the first pizza in the back of
the deck, then the second one next to it.
4 Set the timer and bake forthe recommended
time. Rotate the pizza as instructed in the
recipes. The lower the baking temperature, the less frequently you have to rotate
it. Most pan-baked pizzas require rotating
only once, 180°.
For oven-floor-baked pizzas, depending
402 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
on the size, rotate once or up to 4 times
(rotate 90° each time).
5 Removethe pizza from the oven with a peel.
Theseal taglio pizzas from Panificio Davide Longoni in Milan
are baked in a bread deck oven.
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Combi Oven
FOR FLOOR-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, New York, artisan
1
For a half-sheet-pan-size combi oven, use
a custom-cut baking steel. For a full-sheetpan-size combi oven, place baking stones
or a full-size baking steel inside.
3 Turn the fan to the lowest speed.
4 Shape the pizza dough and apply sauce,
cheese, and toppings (see page 3:3).
2 Preheat the oven to 285-300°C/550-
575° F for at least 10-15 min before baking
to get the steel or baking stones hot
enough.
5
If using a peel, slide the peel's front end to
almost meet the farthest end of the baking
stone or steel. With quick-jerk-back-andforth motions, drop the pizza onto the hot
surface.
6 Set the timer and bake for the recommended time. Rotate the pizza as
instructed in the recipe.
7
Remove the pizza from the oven with a
peel.
Combi ovens do not get hot enough to bake Neapolitanstyle pizzas. The highest temperature that you can get to
is 300°C/575° F, and it won't hold that temperature for
long. You can preheat at this temperature but then turn it
down to 285° C/550° F.
FOR PAN-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: deep-dish, focaccia, New York square, Detroit-style
Set the timer and bake forthe recommended time. Rotate the pizza as
instructed in the recipes.
7 Remove the pizza pan from the oven using
dry kitchen towels, oven mitts, stainless
steel pliers, or grippers.
1 For a half-sheet-pan-size combi oven, use
a custom-cut baking steel. For a full-sheetpan-size combi oven, place baking stones
or a full-size baking steel inside.
3 Turn the fan to the lowest speed. 6
4 Once the dough has proofed in the pan,
apply the sauce, cheese, and toppings (see
page 3:3).
2 Preheat the oven to 285-300°C/550-
575° F for at least 10-15 min before baking
to get the steel or baking stones hot
enough. The exception is focaccia, which
is baked at 245° C/475° F.
5 Slide the pizza directly onto the preheated
baking stone or steel.
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Convection Oven
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, deep-dish, New York, artisan, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, Detroit-style
1
Preheat the oven to 245° C/ 475° F for at least 15-20 min before
baking to get the steel or baking stones hot enough.
2
Follow steps 3-7 in How to Bake Pizza in a Combi Oven above.
BAKING PIZZA 403
11
HOW TO Prepare a Wood-Fired Pizza Oven
Decide what side of the oven you'll use for burning wood. This is a matter of personal preference and has nothing to do with dexterity, but the
wood needs to be on the left, center, or right of the oven floor, not in the
back (you can build the initial fire there, but it will need to be moved to
one side or the other during service).
2 4 5
1
Choose your wood to get the fire started
(see notes below). It should not be too
large (ideally 10-20 cm/4-8 in wide).
3
2
Make a crisscross pattern of similarly sized
logs, making sure they have enough space
in between so that oxygen can flow
through and help the fire burn easily. Use
larger logs only once the oven is already at
temperature; bigger logs will burn longer,
so they don't need to be replaced as
frequently.
We like to place both a rolled-up piece of
newspaper and some wood shavings,
kindling, or sawdust between several of
the logs to get things going. You can also
shoot a stream of lighter fluid over the
whole thing, but be careful when you
reach in to light things up, so you don't
burn yourself.
5
4 Light a long rolled-up piece of newspaper
and use it to light the pieces of newspaper
Now you have the logs lit, but the oven still
isn't ready. It still needs to get hot enough
to cook the pizzas. The time will vary from
oven to oven, but if you start from a cold
oven, it can take a few hours. At closing
time in some pizzerias, they let the fire
burn to embers and close the oven door to
keep it as warm as possible. This way, the
oven will take less time to come up to
temperature the next day.
You'll need to get kiln-dried wood, preferably a hardwood. Oak is the most common in Italy, but beech,
applewood, hickory, mesquite, and almondwood
are also used. Soft woods tend to burn very quickly,
but we noticed in Brazil that compressed eucalyptus
was the most commonly used wood. We don't recommend pine, redwood, spruce, or cedar.
Small rounded logs can be hard to stack since they
roll off each other quite easily. Instead, we suggest
smaller log pieces cut from a large log; they have two
flat sides, which helps keep them in place.
in the oven. Start from the back of the log
pile and move toward the front. The lit
paper should light the wood shavings,
which will then light the logs. If the logs
don't light easily but the wood shavings are
burning, add more rolled-up newspaper
to the mix. Use a pair of long tongs to help
place the paper rolls strategically; don't
just throw in the paper and hope for the
best. Use a peel or shovel to drop wood
shavings over the area that's already lit;
they'll help intensify the fire because they
light quickly.
6 During pizza baking, make sure to keep
feeding logs on the fire, or alternate logs
with wood chips to keep the fire placement (see page 1:354) and desired temperature consistent. You should regularly
sweep ash and spent embers from the
oven floor so they don't stick to the bottom of the pizza.
If you built the fire in the center of the oven, move it
to one side using a metal shovel and sweep the oven
floor to remove any soot.
You can use a metal peel to help tend the fire if the burning
logs start to roll toward where the pizza is baking.
404 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Wood-Fired Pizza Oven
Recommended doughs: Neapolitan, thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, New York, artisan
1
3
Prepare a fire to get the oven up to temperature (see previous page). Our preferred temperature is 455° C/850° F since
we typically use this type of oven for Neapolitan pizzas. You can use it at much
lower temperatures for other styles of
pizza; you will simply need to use less
wood or add logs less frequently.
2 Shape the pizza dough and apply sauce,
cheese, and toppings (see page 3:3).
3 Load the pizza into the oven (see page
390).
4 As soon as you begin to see browning and
blistering on the rim, slide a small peel
under the pizza and begin to rotate it (see
page 406).
5 Lift the pizza by one end with the peel
while it's still inside the oven to check the
under crust. It should be pocked with
small blister marks in an irregular pattern
but not have too many dark blisters.
You'll find a lot of information about wood-fired
ovens in this chapter, including how to prepare the
oven and how to successfully bake a pizza and avoid
burning the crust. We want to emphasize that even
though wood-fired ovens are popular in artisan
pizzerias, there are better ways to get a consistently
good pizza (see page 1:354), especially if you haven't
worked with these oven extensively.
6 Pull the pizza closer to you and check to
see if the sauce and moisture from the
cheese have evaporated enough. If not,
"dome" the pizza by lifting it toward the
domed top of the oven for 5-10 s. Remove
the pizza from the oven with a peel.
The best pizzaioli we have met can bake three pizzas
at a time, but this takes a lot of practice. Two at a
time is more manageable, but we recommend that
you bake only one at a time until you've had plenty
of practice.
As the wood burns down, use a third, much sturdier
peel to move the wood and excess embers before
adding more fuel to the fire.
7 If you're baking a second pizza right away,
make sure you place it in a new spot to
avoid the area of the oven floor that will
have cooled down from the previous pizza.
8 Keep track of the oven temperature while
you're baking. Add more wood, wood
shavings, or sawdust when the temperature starts to drop more than 14° C/25°F.
The main reason to "dome" (or cook only the top by
lifting it up) is to help evaporate any extra water on the
surface of the pizza ifthe rest of it is already baked. If
you have a very wet sauce, it can help eliminate the
excess moisture. Once you have more experience,
however, you won't need to dome your pizza.
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Gas-Fired Pizza Oven
Recommended doughs: Neapolitan, thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, New York, artisan
1 Preheat the oven to 455°C/850°Ffor
11/½-2 h before you start baking.
2 Proceed with steps 2-5 of How to Bake
Pizza in a Wood-Fired Oven (see above).
BAKING PIZZA
3 Remove the pizza from the oven with a
peel.
405
11
PEEL GYMNASTICS IN WOOD-FIRED AND GAS-FIRED PIZZA OVENS
One of the hardest skills to master in a wood-fired or gas-fired pizza oven
is manipulating the pizza in the oven. You need two types of peels, one
to load the pizza and another smaller peel to spin the pizza while it's in
the oven so that it'll bake evenly. The basic motion for handling the pizza
while it is in the oven is the same for both types of ovens, although some
pizziaoli will spin their pizza using a quarter-turn motion (see page 405),
while others spin their pizza continuously (the latter takes a significant
amount of experience). The more you spin it, the more evenly the pizza
will bake. It's important to spin the pizza in the same spot, wherever you
placed it in the oven. Keep in mind that if you are making two pizzas,
you'll have to babysit both, which is why we recommend baking only
one pizza at a time until you've gotten some practice under your belt.
Peel motion
Pizza motion
Load the pizza into the oven. Place it in a spot
where you didn'tjust bake a pizza.
Some pizzaioli spin the pizza constantly rather than doing
quarter turns. Rather than pulling the pizza back and forth,
they are moving it constantly with a motion that traces the
pattern of an oblong oval.
Heat
source
Friction point stays fixed.
The pizza rotates around
the friction point.
10--15 Friction point
Turning inevitably drags the
pizza towards you a little bit
so you will need to pick it up
and push it back.
Peel motion
Place the peel under one side of the pizza, not in
the middle. Tilt the peel up 10-15°. The gravity of
the untilted side will help keep the pizza in place
on the peel.
The next best thing to spinning a real pizza in the oven is to
practice with a plate (we initially tried this with a paper plate,
but it was too light). Pick a plate that weighs between 350 and
400 g; if it's a little heavier, that's fine. Mark one spot with a
dry erase marker and practice spinning the pizza according to
the instructions above.
Because the heat in a wood-fired
oven is asymmetric (see page 1:356),
you'll be exposing different sides of
the pizza to the hottest part of the
oven and browning it as it spins.
Pull back toward you slightly and then push the pizza back
in place, spinning it 90°. Count to 10 and spin it another 90°.
Continue giving the pizza quarter turns until it is baked.
406 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
When the pizza just starts to blister, slide the spinning peel
underneath it.
After you spin the pizza, place it on the center of the peel and return
it to the original spot where it was baking.
Check the bottom of your pizza for doneness when you get close to
the end of baking.
THE BENEFITS OF THE GAS-FIRED PIZZA OVEN
Even heat is the key to baking high-quality pizzas consistently. While it
is widely known that all ovens have hot spots (see page 1:385), we were
surprised to learn how differently the heat is distributed in a wood-fired
versus a gas-fired pizza oven. Even though you use the two ovens in similar ways, and they may appear superficially to be the same, the heat is
much more asymmetrical in a wood-fired pizza oven (see page 1:356).
A gas-fired pizza oven is going to give you a much more accurate oven
temperature, not only in the way that it heats but also because the heat
source is constant. As the wood burns down and is replenished, the temperature fluctuates and is inconsistent. We noticed this pattern when we
visited pizzerias that used wood-burning ovens. Although the pizzaioli
told us that their oven was a certain temperature, when we checked the
temperature with an infrared thermometer, it was almost always different
(and sometimes wildly different) than what they claimed. Their expertise
is what allows them to make great pizza despite the oven being at the
wrong temperature. You'll also need a good deal of practice before you
know how much wood you'll need to burn to achieve a certain temperature. It's an additional step in the realm of learning how to make
Neapolitan pizzas, which is already difficult.
There is also an argument to be made that a gas-fired pizza oven
burns cleaner and is more environmentally friendly than a wood-fired
If your pizza crust is evenly browned but the toppings aren't cooked
to your liking, you can dome the pizza by simply putting it close to
the oven ceiling for a few seconds.
oven. Many cities around the world do not allow or strictly regulate
wood-burning ovens because of the emissions they cause. Gas-fired
ovens are also cleaner. (A cleaner and more even approach is an electric
oven, see page 1:383.) You also have to be aware of where and how you
store wood in your kitchen since it's virtually certain the wood will have
insects on it.
BAKING PIZZA 407
11
HOW TO Bake Pizza in an Impinger Oven
FOR FLOOR-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, Neapolitan, New York, artisan
Eonrgy Saving Mode #1«ON
525 F
230
4
1 Set the speed of the conveyor belt and the
oven temperature.
2 Lightly spray a pizza screen with oil on
both sides. It should be the same diameter
as the finished pizza.
3 Shape the pizza dough and place it directly
on the screen. Adjust the shape if needed.
4 Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings (see
page 3:3) and place the pizza on the conveyor belt with the screen.
5 When the pizza comes out on the other
end, remove it from the conveyor belt with
dry kitchen towels, oven mitts, or a peel.
We include impinger oven temperatures in the
baking tables in the Iconic Recipes chapter, starting
on page 3:3.
FOR PAN-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: deep-dish, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, Detroit-style
3
1 Set the speed of the conveyor belt and the
oven temperature.
2 Once the dough has proofed in the pan,
apply the sauce, cheese, and toppings (see
page 3:3).
3 Place the pan on the conveyor belt.
For thin- and medium-crust pizzas, we highly recommend using a lightly oiled fine-mesh pizza screen or
rack when baking in an impinger oven. They come in a
number of sizes and are extremely helpful in maintaining the pizza's round shape, as well as moving the
dough from the table to the oven without damaging it.
For pizzas baked in a pan, make sure your oven is
large enough and long enough to fit the pan completely, especially for Roman al taglio pizza pans,
which are rather long.
We use a long bench knife (see page 10) or an offset
spatula to remove pan-baked pizzas from the oven.
4 When the pizza comes out on the other
end, remove it from the conveyor belt with
dry kitchen towels, oven mitts, ora peel.
5 Remove the pizza from the pan and place
on a cooling rack.
Impinger ovens can be found in pizzerias both large and small,
including the one below at Imo's that is being used to make
St. Louis-style pizza (see page 1:66).
408 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Home Oven
FOR FLOOR-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, New York, artisan
1 Place a baking steel or stone on an
oven shelf 10 cm /4 in from the broiler.
Preheat to 285°C/550° F for 30 min
before baking.
2 Shape the pizza dough and apply sauce,
cheese, and toppings (see page 3:3).
4
3 If using a peel, slide the peel's front end to
almost meet the farthest end of the baking
stone or steel. With quick-jerk-back-andforth motions, drop the pizza onto the hot
surface.
5
5
Set the timer and bake for the recommended time. Rotate the pizza as
instructed in the recipe.
Remove the pizza from the oven with a
peel.
Neapolitan pizzas can't be baked in home ovens
since they cannot reach the high temperatures
needed for this style of pizza.
Most home ovens' highest temperature setting is
between 275-285°C/525-550°F. Go as high as
you can.
Make sure your pan fits inside the oven before you
begin; ideally it will fit evenly on top of the baking
steel or baking stone.
To transfer dough using parchment paper, shape
your pizza and place it on a square of parchment
paper that is about 5 cm/2 in wider than the diameter of your pizza. Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings
(see page 3:3) and place the parchment paper onto
a peel or an upside-down sheet pan. Slide the pizza
onto the hot surface.
FOR PAN-BAKED PIZZAS
Recommended doughs: deep-dish, focaccia, New York square, high-hydration al taglio, Detroit-style
1 Place a baking steel or stone on an oven
shelf 10 cm/ 4 in from the broiler. Preheat
to 285°C/ 550° F for 30 min before baking.
2 Once the dough has proofed in the pan,
apply the sauce, cheese, and toppings (see
page 3:3).
4
5
3 Slide the pan directly onto the preheated
baking stone or steel.
5
BAKING PIZZA
Set the timer and bake for the recommended time.
Remove the pizza pan from the oven using
dry kitchen towels, oven mitts, or stainless
steel pliers.
409
11
IMPROVING THE PERFORMANCE OF A NON-PIZZA OVEN
Pizza ovens have a hearth floor that gets extremely hot and retains a
substantial amount of heat when it is preheated. So, when you put a
pizza on it, there's significant heat transfer from conduction. Ovens that
are not specifically designed to bake pizzas can present some challenges
to the pizza maker. The ovens that are toughest to produce good pizza in
are home ovens (with or without convection), professional convection
ovens, and combi ovens.
Ifyou have one ofthose, what can you do to make it work better? The
answer varies slightly from oven to oven, but the most important factors
are providing a direct heat source to the bottom of the pizza and getting
the oven as hot as possible. (Pizza ovens are built to do both, with varying
degrees ofsuccess; see page 1:375.) Keep in mind that these are the key
factors regardless of the style of pizza. Thin-crust and medium-crust pizzas
need the high heat for their crust development but even pan-baked pizzas
benefit from the heat in order to achieve a crispy bottom crust.
In a traditional pizza oven, the ambient temperature of the air is vastly
higher and air makes much less of a contribution (see page 1:354). By contrast, home ovens work by heating the air within the oven. Because home
ovens operate at temperatures that are hundreds of degrees colder than a
pizza oven, heat transfer from the air is important. If a home oven has convection heat, the oven has a fan that blows the heat around the oven. This
speeds up the cooking time, but it can set the pizza crust too quickly and
contribute to a reduction in volume. When you load the pizza into a home
oven and close the door, the oven will take some time to recover. Combi
and convection ovens will take less time to do so since the circulating hot
air makes the oven come up to temperature faster than in a still oven.
Additionally, a home oven doesn't have a floor like a pizza oven, and
the thin metal walls don't help the situation because they don't hold
enough heat. We tried using a baking stone to mimic the hearth of a pizza
oven. The problem is that the stone in a pizza oven is much thicker and
gets much hotter, so even though the material is the same, using a baking
stone isn't that great at improving the performance of a non-pizza oven.
The best way to try to replicate the floor of a pizza oven in a nonpizza oven is to preheat your oven with a baking steel or baking stone for
10-20 minutes (home ovens benefit from a 30-minute preheat). For most
pizza styles, we recommend the you place the steel on a shelf 10 cm/
4 in from the broiler in combi, convection, or still electric or gas ovens.
Sometimes, we recommend turning on the broiler at some point during
baking (see the individual recipes for specific recommendations). Make
sure that your oven is calibrated and that you use an oven thermometer
to verify the temperature of the oven (see page 1:392).
You can also stack two baking steels on top of each other to retain
and radiate heat more evenly. Or you can separate them and cook more
pizzas at the same time. If you are making pizzas frequently in these
ovens, it might be worth investing in two steels. Keep in mind, however,
that some oven racks can't support the weight of two steels and the racks
can bend and fall in the oven. Most baking steels won't fit exactly on the
shelves of a combi or convection oven, so you might consider getting a
custom-cut steel if you will be making pizza often, we recommend
1.25 cm/12-in thick-cut steel or 2.5 cm/1-in thick-cut aluminum.
The next best thing to a baking steel is a baking stone. This functions
in much the same way but doesn't retain heat as well as the steel. You can
use untreated paving tiles to replicate a baking stone but you'll likely need
to put a grid of them in your oven to create an area large enough to bake a
pizza on, which can be unwieldy. Paving tiles fit nicely in toaster ovens and
can be used to improve pizzas that you bake or reheat in them.
Another great alternative to using a baking steel is making pizza in a
cast-iron skillet or griddle either in the oven or on a stove top. You want
to use something that is flat, shallow, and large enough to cook your
pizza. We prefer round cast-iron skillets to rectangular griddles but either
will do (round cast-iron griddles with handles, similar to what sizzling
fajitas are served on, work well). Be sure to preheat the cast iron to the
temperature indicated in the recipe before making your pizza.
While cast-iron skillets provide consistent bottom heat to the pizza,
they aren't capable of giving you top heat. We like to use them in conjunction with a heat gun for the stove top or a high-heat broiler in the
oven to bake the cheese and toppings to the perfect doneness. We tried
using a blowtorch to brown the top of the pizza but it was less successful than the heat gun. The other benefit to using cast-iron skillets that is
worth mentioning is that they are multipurpose. As a last resort, you can
preheat a stack of three or four upside-down sheet pans to try to provide
extra bottom heat to the pizza as it bakes.
For home ovens, you can preheat the oven 15°C/25°F higher than
the recipe's baking temperature calls for, if your oven allows. This is so
that the temperature drop from opening the oven door isn't so dramatic.
Make sure that when you do close the door and the oven goes back to
the desired temperature, you set the oven to the correct temperature in
the recipe.
For more on the reasons why you should use a baking steel or stone, see page 1:391.
Keep in mind that you need to maintain your baking steel (in much the same way
as cast iron). Before using the baking steel, season it with oil and burn it off. Don't
wash your baking steel. If something gets crusted on it, scrub it with salt to clean it.
Rub the steel with coats of oil in between uses so that it doesn't rust.
Using a pizza screen (see page 388) makes it easier to load the pizza into the oven.
Be sure to coat the screen with spray oil before using. Remove the pizza from the
screen a couple of minutes after it goes into the oven so that the bottom of the
pizza can brown properly. Slide a peel in between the pizza and the screen and
then take the screen out of the oven with tongs or a kitchen towel.
410 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
Single baking steel
Two baking steels (used alone or in combination)
Shallow cast-iron pan
Baking stone
Stack of 3 or 4 sheet pans
These pieces of equipment can
improve a non-pizza oven, starting
with our highest recommendation
at the top.
HOW TO Cook Pizza on the Stove
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, Neapolitan, New York, artisan
3 5a 5b
1 Preheat a grill pan or cast-iron pan to
220°C/425° F.
2 Shape the dough according to its master
recipe. Spray the surface of the dough with
olive oil.
3 Place the dough oiled side down in the
pan and cook for 2-21/½ min. While the
pizza is cooking, spray the top surface with
olive oil.
4 Remove the dough from the pan and flip it
over on a plate or cutting board with the
baked side facing up. Apply sauce, cheese,
and toppings (see notes below).
5 Return the pizza to the pan and cook for
about 3 min. As the pizza is cooking, use a
heat gun on the toppings and crust of the
pizza to help with heating and browning.
6 Remove the pizza from the pan.
You can use a flat cast-iron skillet or a cast-iron
pan with a grill texture. We recommend using
the shallow portion of a 30 cm/12 in cast-iron
combi cooker.
If you are making Brazilian thin-crust pizza, it's very
important that you replace the flour in the recipе
with high-gluten flour (we recommend King Arthur
Sir Lancelot High Gluten Flour). Follow the master
recipe just until it's time to divide it. Youll divide the
dough into 150 g pieces and shape into balls before
proofing for the recommended time. You may be able
to divide the dough into 175 g pieces, if desired, but
you run the risk ofthe pizza being too big for the pan.
Keep your sauce, cheese, and other toppings at
room temperature so they get hot and/or melt faster.
Don't overcrowd the pizza with toppings. The more
you put on top, the less hot the toppings will get.
We recommend using a medium-thick sauce, such
as the New York/ Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 227). Spread it evenly across the top of the
pizza, leaving a border for the rim.
CAN YOU MAKE PIZZA IN A TOASTER OVEN?
The toaster oven isn't exactly your best option for making pizza. Iť's not
the worst, either, but it helps to understand its limitations beforehand.
It usually has a very small capacity, so you can make only small pizzas.
Most won't even fit a 30 cm/12 in pizza. And most of them top out at
230°C/450° F. There are no baking stones or steels on the market that
will fit inside these ovens. Most toaster ovens come with small sheet pans
that are just the right size to fit inside. Use this sheet pan if you're trying
to make a pan-baked pizza. A half-size Detroit style pizza pan will fit in
most toaster ovens and will actually produce a reasonably good result.
Some casserole pans can also be used, but they don't really produce
a crisp bottom. Pie tins will work as well, but we suggest using nondisposable tins because disposable pie tins are very flimsy. We also found
that toaster ovens work well for crisping up the surface of our pizza
gourmet dough and, of course, they do a fine job of reheating pizza
(see page 3:313).
412 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
6
HOW TO Bake in a Breville Pizzaiolo Pizza Oven
STYLE
1 Preheat the oven for 10-15 min by turning
the temperature and darkness all the way
up.
You have very little wiggle room in the oven when
it comes to the size of the pizza. You can assemble
the pizza on the peel to ensure the correct size, but
it should be properly floured and you need to work
quickly.
2 Shape your pizza with the peel next to it so
that you can make sure that it is the right
size.
When testing consumer countertop pizza ovens, we
found the Breville to be the one that was the easiest
to use and that gave you the high heat you need to
make top-notch pizzas.
3 Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings.
4 Slide the pizza into the oven and set a
timer. It'll take 2-21½ min to bake. Rotate it
once while it's in the oven.
A
BAKING PIZZA 413
11
HOW TO Grill Pizza
FOR A 55 CM / 22 IN CHARCOAL GRILL
Recommended dough: Brazilian thin-crust
1
3
Prepare a charcoal grill. Once the coals are
ready, move them so they're on only half
of the grill. You're aiming for temperatures
that are above 480° C/900°F on the
charcoal side and about 205° C/ 400°F on
the non-charcoal side.
2 Roll out the dough with a rolling pin to an
oval/rectangular shape. It should be 30-35
cm long by 10-15 cm wide by 6 mm thick/
12-14 in long by 4-6 in wide by 1¼ in thick.
4 Place on the non-charcoal side of the grill.
Close the lid and cook for 45 s-1 min.
5 Remove the dough from the grill.
3 Dock the dough (see page 3:12) and spray
the surface with olive oil.
6 Flip the dough over so that the baked side
is facing up and apply sauce, cheese, and
toppings (see notes on the next page).
9 Remove the pizza from the grillusing a
peel.
7 Place the topped pizza back on the grill,
off-center toward the charcoal side.
414
8 Keeping the lid up, cook for 1 min, then
rotate the pizza 180° and cook for 1 min
more. If the toppings still need additional
time, move the pizza to the cooler side
and close the grill lid for no more than 30 s
at a time.
Grilled Brazilian thin-crust pizza with thin-crust
tomato sauce, provolone, 'nduja, and arugula
FOR A GAS GRILL
Recommended doughs: thin-crust, Brazilian thin-crust, Neapolitan, New York, artisan
3 4
1 Prepare a gas grill by turning all the heat
settings to high.
2 Once the grill has reached 370-425°C/
700-800°F, turn off one side of the grill
and keep the other side on high heat.
3 Shape the dough according to its master
recipe. Dock the dough (see page 3:12)
and spray the surface with olive oil.
4 Place the dough oiled side down on the
high-heat side of the grill and cook for 1
min. While the pizza is cooking, spray the
top surface with olive oil.
5 Flip the dough over and cook for 1 min.
6 Remove the dough from the grill and apply
sauce, cheese, and toppings (see notes
below).
11
7 Place the topped pizza on the nonheated
side of the grill (it should be around
150° C/300° F). Close the lid. Cook for 6
min, checking the pizza every 2 min.
Grilled thin-crust pizza with thincrust tomato sauce, pizza cheese,
Italian sausage, gorgonzola, and
toasted pine nuts
8
If the pizza still feels a little flabby after 6
min, move to the high-heat side for an
additional 30-90 s, keeping the grill lid up
to crisp the pizza.
9 Remove the pizza from the grill using a
peel.
We tested a number of doughs for grilling pizza, and
our favorite recipe was our Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough (see page 114) since it can be rolled outvery
thin, is easy to handle, and gets nicely crisp after grilling. (In fact, we had grilled Brazilian thin-crust pizza
when we visited São Paulo; see page 1:190.) It's very
important that you replace the flour in the recipе
with high-gluten flour (we recommend King Arthur
Sir Lancelot High Gluten Flour). Follow the master
recipe just until it's time to divide it. You'll divide the
dough into 150 g pieces and shape into balls before
proofing for the recommended time.
Keep your sauce, cheese, and other toppings at
room temperature so they get hot and/or melt faster.
Don't overcrowd the pizza with toppings. The more
you put on top, the less hot the toppings will get.
We recommend using a medium-thick sauce, such
as the New York / Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 227). Spread itevenly across the top of the
pizza, leaving a border forthe rim.
Don't grillpizza side by side with meat oranything
that might cause flare-ups.
БАЗА ПРЕМИУМ
БИБЛИОТЕКИ
BF
COOKING PIZZA IN PORTABLE OVENS
Although you can typically find individual grills at campsites (or communal grills in some cases), sometimes you want to take your outdoor
adventure to the next level. Fortunately, there is a class of portable ovens
that will allow you to do just that. While some of these ovens offer the
option of heating with wood chips, we prefer to use propane because it
gets hotter and maintains a more consistent temperature.
When making pizza outside, keep your portioned dough(s) in a
cooler in a lightly oiled plastic container. Even though we don't recommend oiling all of our pizza doughs when you are working in a kitchen,
we do in this case because it'll make it much easier to transport and
use. Once you get to your destination, take the dough, sauce, cheese,
and toppings out of the cooler 2 hours before you want to eat (if it's hot
Using a pizza screen (see page 388) makes it easier to load the pizza into the
oven. Be sure to coat the screen with spray oil before using. Keep the pizza on the
screen the entire time that it bakes and rotate it. You can also assemble and bake
HOW TO Bake Pizza in a Portable Oven
out, the dough might need less time to proof). Preheat the oven 30-45
minutes before you bake the pizza.
Bring a 30-33 cm/12-13 inch cutting board with you, for both assembling the pizza and cutting it after it is baked. (You can assemble the pizza
on the peel but you must be quick so it doesn't stick.) Load the pizza into
the oven. Rotate the pizza two to three times to make sure that it bakes
evenly. The portable ovens that we tried recovered pretty quickly, so you
can continue to make pizzas as long as you want.
When you are done baking pizzas, be sure that the oven is completely
cool before putting it away. The propane tank should be shut off and
disconnected. If you used wood chips, they need to be completely extinguished and disposed of responsibly.
the pizza on parchment paper (see page 391) but not if you are using wood chips
to heat the oven because it will burn.
1 Quickly assemble the pizza on the peel so
that it doesn't stick. Reshape the pizza, if
necessary, before loading it in the oven.
2 Load the pizza into the oven. 3
4
416 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
3
Once the rim starts to blister and brown,
rotate the pizza.
Spin the pizza as needed to ensure that it
bakes evenly.
HOW TO Fry Pizza
FOR A STANDARD FRYER
Recommended doughs: Neapolitan, New York, artisan
4
11
1 Make sure the dough ball weighs no more
than 150-175 g for a 30 cm/12 in pizza.
3 Place the shaped pizza in the fryer (for
pizza style-specific tips, see page 3:157).
2 Heat the oil in the fryer to 175-190°C/
350-375°F.
4
Electric and gas fryers are a common sight in many
professional kitchens. They're not as common at
home due to size and the space they require. Electric
and gas fryers are convenient because their temperature can be regulated. While vastly cheaper, a pot of
oil on the stove needs to be constantly monitored
for temperature fluctuations.
Use a high-quality flavorless frying oil with a high
smoke point. Don't use extra-virgin olive oil of any
kind for deep-frying because it will burn before it
reaches an adequate frying temperature. Canola,
peanut (be careful of peanut allergies), vegetable,
safflower, corn, cottonseed, and sunflower oils are
all good options.
Submerge the pizza after 10-20 s or allow
the bottom side to get golden brown and
then gently turn the pizza over.
We use this method to make pizza montanara, a
pizza made with fried dough (see page 3:157), but
you can also use this method for pizza fritta (see
page 3:159) and calzone.
Most oils need to be changed every day or two; old
oil makes everything taste bad.When you fry things
like pizza that likely have flour on the outside, that
flour will come off in the fryer and sink to the bottom, eventually burning. This burnt flavor will attach
itself to whatever you fry next. Some fryers have filtering systems, but these are more of an investment.
When shaping the dough, use very little flour so that
the excess flour doesn't burn in the fryer.
5 Once both sides are the same color, lift
the pizza out of the fryer, and drain in a
colafritto or place it on a sheet pan or
plate lined with paper towels to drain
any excess oil.
You can fry pizza montanara in a regular gas or electric fryer, but you can also get a gas or electric montanara pizza fryer. Or you can go low-tech and use a
regular pot with a round basket that can be used to
submerge the pizza in the oil and lift it out.
A colafritto allows steam to escape from the bottom of the pizza
through the holes so that the crust doesn't get soggy.
BAKING PIZZA 417
FOR AN IMPROVISED SHALLOW FRYER
Recommended doughs: Neapolitan, New York, artisan
3 4
8 To finish the topped pizza, there are two
options:
1 Make sure the dough ball weighs no more
than 150-175 g maximum for a 30 cm/
12 in pizza.
2 Heat 1.25 cm / ½ in oil to 190°C/375° F in
a 36 cm/14 in sauté or cast-iron pan over
medium-high heat. Insert a thermometer
into the oil occasionally to keep track of
the temperature and adjust the heat as
needed.
3 Shape the dough according to its master
recipe (see page 3:3).
4 Carefully place the dough in the oil. Fry for
5 min, usinga spider to press down on the
center of the dough to keep it submerged
in the oil.
7 Apply sauce, cheese, and toppings.
5 Halfway through frying, carefully flip the
dough.
8a
6 Remove the pizza from the pan, and place
it on a sheet pan or plate lined with paper
towels to drain any excess oil.
For home cooks, there aren't many choices for deep
fryers that would be large enough to hold even
the smallest 30 cm/12 in pizza. Even if there were,
it takes a lot of oil to fill it, and few home kitchen
hoods work well enough to keep your house from
smelling like a fast-food restaurant. We came up with
this improvised shallow fryer option to allow you to
more easily make fried pizza at home.
Keep your sauce, cheese, and other toppings at
room temperature so they get hot and/or melt faster.
Don't overcrowd the pizza with toppings. The more
you put on top, the less hot the toppings will get.
We recommend using a medium-thick sauce, such
as the New York/Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce (see
page 227). Spread it evenly across the top of the
pizza, leaving a border for the rim.
If you're making fried pizza in a professional setting
and baking the topped pizza using Neapolitan baking temperatures, it won't take very long. We suggest
keeping the pan close to the mouth of the oven
and rotating it frequently so the cheese melts and
the dough doesn't burn. Other lower-temperature
professional ovens are gentler and will take longer
to melt the cheese with less babysitting on your part,
but keep an eye on it anyway. Remember that the
dough is already cooked completely at this point
and thus can only get darker.
8b
Place the pizza in a pie pan or a similarly sized pan. Put in a 285°C/550° F
oven or under the broiler for 1-2 min
until the cheese melts.
Alternatively, use a heat gun to apply
heat to the toppings and crust of the
pizza to help with browning and heating. This will also brown the cheese and
scorch the crust slightly, giving it a Neapolitan pizza look (see photo below).
This method is a different way of making a montanara. It's also drafting on the traditions among
Native American fry bread, Mexican sopaipillas, and
Scottish bannock.
Montanara pizza with ricotta, pizza cheese,
prosciutto, artichoke, and caper berries
This basic fryer setup consists of an aluminum pot with a pair of baskets
that willallow you to sandwich dough between them and fry it to create a
montanara pizza. If you don't have one of these fryers, using a spider to create the depression in the center of the dough works just fine (see page 417).
418 VOLUME 2: TECHNIQUES AND INGREDIENTS
PARBAKING AND PREBAKING PIZZA
The term "parbaking” is used a lot in the baking
industry. It's a process that involves baking bread
until it's about 90% done, allowing it to cool, then
finishing the baking later. The initial baking period is
enough to deactivate the yeasts and enzymes and set
the structure of the crust and crumb (so the loaf can
maintain its shape as it cools), but not enough to fully
brown the crust. Technically, the bread is edible after
parbaking, but it isn't appetizing. Even if you haven't
parbaked bread yourself, you've seen the technique
numerous times. You know those pale baguettes in
the grocery store that you take home and pop in the
oven to warm and brown? Parbaked. It can work quite
well-for bread, anyway.
But what about parbaking pizza? Does it work
the same as bread? More importantly, does it
deliver the same glorious results that you get when
you bake your pizza normally? In some cases, it
does work well (see page 420). For example, if you
are selling frozen pizza or if you are a caterer and
you have an off-site event, you can parbake your
pizzas two-thirds to three-quarters of the way,
freeze them, and then finish baking them later. We
also found that parbaking works well for thin-crust
pizzas and medium-crust pizzas (especially if you're
freezing them).
We decided to test another technique that lets
you do part of the work in advance: prebaking. In
prebaking, the pizza is cooked all the way through
When we traveled to Chicago, we ran
into many deep-dish pizzas that had
the same problem: excessive gel layer
(see page 1:370). When we suggested
prebaking the pizza shells to mitigate
this problem, many pizzaioli scoffed
at the idea. We wish that there wasn't
such a stigma surrounding prebaking
deep-dish pizza. It would make fora
better slice!
For more on the gel layer problem, see page
1:370.
Al taglio pizza with artichoke,
cherry tomatoes, green olives,
and arugula
419
11
At Panificio Menchetti in Arezzo, Italy, they
make al taglio-style pizza bases that are later
topped and served. We recommend fully
prebaking al taglio pizza in order to preventa
gum line (see page 1:370).
A dough press is technically a prebaking,
as well as shaping, method, but it works
well only for thin-crust pizzas (see page
3:14).
and can be reheated later. If you're in the pizza
business-or even if you're throwing a pizza party
at home; see next page-the ability to prebake can
help organize the workflow because you do most of
the baking ahead of time.
Prebaking is part of the standard process when
you're making a New York square pizza (see page
3:133). This pizza is baked and cooled, then sauced
and topped later if you are using it as the foundation
of a pizza. Prebaking is how we make the pizza
gourmet style on page 3:151. Al taglio pizzas are
also prebaked, sometimes with sauce and sometimes
just the dough alone. Then they're cooled, and
additional toppings can be added later and the pizza
can be heated again in the oven.
We wondered if prebaking could streamline the
process for other kinds of pizza, too. The answer is
yes-for some styles of pizza. You may, however,
prebake thin-crust and medium-crust pizzas for the
purpose of freezing (see table on page 3:331). In
those cases, the pizzas are prebaked with sauce and
cooled. We recommend adding cheese just before
baking. (Adding the cheese before baking on a
prebaked pizza will influence the cheese's complex
melt rheology and textural attributes.) When you're
ready to eat, you don't even need to defrost; you can
bake it straight from its frozen form (see the tables
on page 3:324 for more guidance).
For a few pizza styles, we found another big benefit
of prebaking: it helps eliminate the gel layer (see page
1:370). That's the pale, gooey layer of underbaked
dough we found in nearly every deep-dish or square
pizza slices we ate during our travels (see page 1:101).
We found that by prebaking the dough alone, the gel
layer can be eliminated. Sauce, cheese, and toppings
are added later, then the pizza is reheated. You'll
notice that our New York square and al taglio pizzas
specifically call for prebaking. You can also prebake
Detroit-style pizzas, although it's not necessary
because you don't get a gum line.We have extensive
information on holding, freezing, storing, and reheating pizzas in the chapter beginning on page 3:293.
Prebaked sauced al taglio pizza wrapped for freezing
HOW TO Make Pizza for a Crowd
1 4 5
1 Once the pizzas have been baked and
cooled, cut them into portions using a
serrated knife.
2 Place the sliced pizzas back in their baking
pans, cover, and set aside until you're
ready to reheat.
3 About 1h before you're ready to serve the
pizzas, place one or ideally two baking
stones or baking steels stacked in the oven.
Preheat the oven to 230° C/450°F.
4
To reheat the pizzas, uncover them and
simply slide the pans onto the hot baking
steels or baking stones. They'll take 5-7
min to reheat and recrisp the bottom.
5
For Detroit-style pizza, apply the hot
tomato sauce over each hot slice, plus any
other post-bake toppings. For al taglio
pizza, apply any heat-sensitive toppings,
like arugula, blue cheese, or tapenade,
after baking.
6 Transfer to a serving platter.
THE LOGISTICS OF COOKING FOR A CROWD
When you think of cooking for many people, you might envision a vast
event space with a caterer whipping up hundreds of plates of food
behind the scenes (or in front of the guests if they have interactive
stations). Although pizza is extremely popular and might be tempting
to serve at one of these events, it comes with some risks, depending on
the type of pizza that you choose to serve. If you go with a Neapolitan
or artisan pizza, you'll be able to serve only one guest at a time, you'll
need a special oven to do the job right, and it'll require someone with a
high level of expertise to make the pizza. And this assumes that you are
making the pizzas a la minute in front of the guests because these styles
of pizzas won't hold for longer than a few minutes (see page 3:295). You
could opt to make larger New York pizzas that will feed multiple people
and reheat well (this is, after all, the business model for countless slice
shops across the United States). But we don't think that it's the absolute
best solution. We'll come to that in a minute.
Another scenario that may have you cooking for a crowd is that
you've decided to have a pizza party at home. It can be a very fun occasion ifyou plan it correctly and choose the right pizzas. Your guests want
to see you (presumably!), so it's not ideal to be stuck in the kitchen the
whole time. If you have an outdoor wood-fired oror ppropane-fueled oven,
you can bake pizzas while your guests hang out around you or even help.
Indoors, the spaces are tighter, the ovens are generally smaller, and you
can bake only so many pizzas at a time.
Our recommended solution for both cases is to choose to make
pizzas that reheat very well and can be made well in advance: New York
Square Pizza (see page 3:133), Detroit-Style Pizza (see page 3:109; shown
at right), or Al Taglio Pizza (see see page 3:141). You can make the pizza
crusts ahead of time, cool them down, wrap them in plastic wrap, and
freeze them for up to 6 months. In the case of catering, you can bake
them offsite, freeze them (if you'd like), and transport them to the event.
You don't even need to defrost them. We have detailed instructions on
reheating pizzas in a commercial environment and at home on pages
3:315-3:327. You can reheat whole pans or slices. You can slice ahead of
time too.
You might want to have a toppings station. Your guests can either tell
the event staff what they want on their pizzas or, if you are entertaining at
home, they can build their own pizzas using the naked prebaked pizzas.
This will let you spend less time alone in the kitchen and more time with
your guests.
BAKING PIZZA 421
11
INDE✗
A
aioli, 259
Aioli (recipe), 264
Garlic Confit Aioli, 264
Gochujang Aioli, 264
Milk Aioli (Eggless Aioli), 264
vegan substitute for, 265
Wasabi Aioli, 264
al taglio pizza dough. See High-Hydration Al Taglio
Pizza Dough master recipе
Al Taglio Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
Alfredo Sauce, 272
aluminum sheet pans, 68-69
Amatriciana Sauce, 227
American mozzarella. See “pizza cheese"
amylose and amylopectin, 24, 26-27
Ancient Grain Pizza Dough variations, 102
by pizza style, 181
Anderson, Sam, 323
anticaking agents in shredded mozzarella, 302
Apizza Dough, 138
Apizza Dough Variation, 139
Apollonia's Pizzeria (Los Angeles, CA), 93, 308
Argentinean pizza pans, 69
Argentinean-Style "al Molde" Pizza Dough, 170
about, 92
Armenian string cheese, 299
aromatic ingredients for stock, 270
Artisan Bread in Five Minutes a Day (Hertzberg and
François), 43
Artisan Pizza Dough master recipe, 142-144
See also Artisan pizza sauce
attributes of style and, 91
baking methods for, 402-409, 412, 413, 415,
417, 418
transferring dough, 390-391
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amounts recommended for, 304
doneness and, 398
dough substitutions for, 98
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
Direct Artisan Pizza Dough, 146
Emergency Artisan Pizza Dough, 147
High-Hydration Artisan Pizza Dough, 146
Modernist Artisan Pizza Dough, 145
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing time and temperature for, 75
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Artisan Pizza Dough, 196
Gluten-Free Artisan Pizza Dough Variation,
196
variations of
Ancient Grain Artisan Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Artisan Pizza Dough,
174-175
Country-Style Artisan Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 187, 189
Grain, Nut, or Seed Artisan Pizza Dough,
178-179
Levain-Raised Artisan Pizza Dough, 172-173
No-Knead Artisan Pizza Dough, 182–183
Second-Chance Levain Artisan Pizza Dough,
173
Your Daily Pizza Artisan Pizza Dough,
184-185
Artisan pizza sauce
Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce, 227
Amatriciana Sauce, 227
Modernist Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce, 227
recommended consistency for, 244
in Spicy Vodka Sauce, 229
in Tomato and Mustard Sauce, 229
White Tomato Sauce (see note), 229
Arugula Mayonnaise, 263
ascorbic acid, 72
Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana. See AVPN
autolyse, 23, 32-33
AVPN (Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana)
flours permitted by, 87
mixer recommended by, 38
proofing specifications, 89
saucing on worktable and, 204
AVPN Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 130-131
B
Bagna Cauda Sauce, 271
Baker, J. C., 28
baker's percentage (baker's math), 18
calculating ingredient weight using, 21
calculating net contents, 19, 20
calculating, with a preferment, 19
sample recipe, 20
scaling recipes without, 21
baking pans
See also pan-baked pizzas
preparing dough for proofing in, 73
types of, 66, 68-69
baking pizza, 387-421
common problems, 400-401
gel layer formation and, 393, 420
doneness and, 8, 398-399
extreme temperatures for, 397
methods of, 395
cooking for a crowd and, 421
factors affecting final results, 396
improving non-pizza ovens, 410-411
oven types and, 402-418
parbaking and prebaking, 419-420
spinning pizza, techniques for, 406-407
unconventional methods, 412-418
oven spring, 27, 71, 387
transferring floor-baked doughs, 388
methods of, 390-391
tools for, 388-389
transforming dough into pizza, processes of, 27,
392-393
baking stones or baking steel, 395, 410-411
Barbecue Sauce, 267
båtards
preshaping method for, 62
Roman Pizza alla Pala Dough, 164
Béchamel, 252
Garlic Chive Béchamel, 254
gellan gum as thickener for, 245
Modernist Béchamel, 253
Mornay sauce, 253
Ranchamel, 253
beef toppings, 376
beginners, pizza doughs for, 108
bench resting, 48, 49
Beurre Blanc, Ultrastable, 261
Bianchino, Lorenzo, 299
Bianco, Chris, 388
biaxial stretching (biaxial extension), 71
Bisque Sauce, 275
biteability, 344, 353
black spots in pizza dough, preventing, 72
blue cheeses, 300, 353
Blue Cheese Frankencheese,333
Bolognese Sauce, 270
Bonci, Gabriele, 92
book folds, 50
Bostwick Consistometer, 244
bottom of pizza. See under crust
Bráz Quintal (Brazil), 65
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough master recipe,
114-116
423
See also Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce
attributes of style and, 85
baking methods for, 402–409, 412-415
transferring dough, 390–391
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amounts recommended for, 304
docking, 84
dough substitutions for, 96
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
Grilled Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
117
Modernist Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 116
30 Fat Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
117
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 193
Gluten-Free Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough Variation, 193
variations of
Ancient Grain Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 174–175
Country-Style Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 186, 188
Levain-Raised Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 172-173
No-Knead Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 182-183
Second-Chance Levain Brazilian Thin-Crust
Pizza Dough, 173
Your Daily Pizza Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 184-185
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
recommended consistency for, 244
bread deck ovens, 402
bread-like pizza doughs
See also Detroit-Style Pizza Dough master recipe;
Focaccia Dough master recipe; High-Hydration
Al Taglio Pizza Dough master recipe; New
York Square Pizza Dough master recipe
baking and, 392
gel layer formation, 393, 420
crumb of, 7
higher hydration of, 83
overview of styles, 91-93
Breville Pizzaiolo Pizza Ovens, 413
424
Brix degrees, 211, 219
Brown Stock Sauce, 268
browning
cheese and, 308
experiments on, 309
recommended types for, 306
crust and
baking, changes during, 27, 392-393
doneness vs. overdone, 398-399
Maillard reaction and, 27, 393
toppings and, 351
charring, methods of, 363
bubble formation, 28, 71
buckwheat flour, in Ancient Grain Pizza Dough
variations, 181
buffalo's milk mozzarella, 286, 293, 321, 323
See also mozzarella
bulk fermentation, 48-49
See also bench resting
benefits of, 49
bubble formation and, 71
comparing strategies for dough types, 49
factors affecting, 49
folding methods, 50-51
Neapolitan pizza dough and
experiments on right method for, 88
methods used in Naples vs. rest of Italy, 89
processes inside pizza dough during, 26
refrigerating wet doughs during, 59
Bulk Stretched Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 326
burrata, 298
Burrata (recipe), 331
origin of, 299
Buttermilk Mozzarella, Modernist, 330
Buttermilk Ricotta, 339
C
Cacio e Pepe Sauce, 274
caciocavallo, 294, 298, 315
Callegari, Stefano
Cacio e Pepe Sauce, 274
calling proof, 70, 76
fingertip test, 76-77
rescuing overproofed dough (Dough CPR), 77
Calvel, Raymond, 32
Campanile, Antonio, 290
canned tomatoes. See tomato sauces
caramelizing. See pressure-caramelizing
carbon dioxide. See bubble formation
Carbonara Sauce, 272
Caseificio "Al Valico," 290
casein, 287, 292
cast-iron pans or skillets, 69
cooking pizza on stove top and, 412
shallow frying method for cooking pizza, 418
use for improving non-pizza ovens, 410-411
Catupiry cheese, origin of, 312
Cauliflower Puree, Pressure-Caramelized, 191
cellulose gum, as sauce thickener, 246
center loading, 351
Charcoal Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 327
Charcoal Mascarpone, 255
charring toppings, 363
chechil, 299
cheddar cheese
cheese-making process and, 291
in Modernist Cheese Sauce, 255
prolonging shelflife, methods for, 312-313
vegan option for, 311
cheese, 285-339
See also cheese making; cheese sauces; mozzarella; ricotta
applying to pizza, 303
adding first, before sauce, 207
portioning, importance of, 305
recommended amounts, by pizza style, 304
shredded vs. sliced, 296, 299, 302
burrata, 298
Burrata (recipe), 331
origin of, 299
Catupiry cheese, origin of, 312
"cheese pull," 285
choosing and combining, suggestions for,
306-307
classification of, by texture and moisture content,
294-295
common problems, 310
common types, used on pizza, 297
expensiveness of, 287
Frankencheeses (cheese blends),332
Blue Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Fresh Goat Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Parmesan Frankencheese, 333
Frico (Cheese Crisps), 372
ideal, for pizzas, 296
meltability and browning, 308
experiments on, 309
in Modernist Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 121
Parmesan shakers, 351
preparation of, 296
cheese categories and, 297-300
equipment for, 301
portioning and, 305
shredded vs. sliced, 296, 299, 302
Provel cheese, origin of, 300
storing, 320
freezing, 312
MAP technique for, 313
string cheeses, 291, 299, 300
vegan, recommendations for, 311
cheese curds, 290, 319
using on pizza, 318
cheese making, 290, 319
basic process of, 291
casein protein and, 287, 292
Cultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 328
direct acidification vs. using cultures, 315
LAB cultures for, 292
milk and, 286
composition of cow's milk, 286-287
vs. buffalo's milk, 286
fat content and, 286-287, 291
history of technology and, 288-289
raw vs. pasteurized, 288–289
rennet andother coagulants, 293
Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 324-325
using pH meter in, 292
cheese sauces
See also ricotta
Cacio e Pepe Sauce, 274
Charcoal Mascarpone, 255
Modernist Cheese Sauce, 255
Mornay sauce, 253
Raclette Slice, 255
recommended cheese types for, 307
chemical properties of pizza dough, 29
Chemically-Leavened Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 122
Chicago pizzas
deep-dish style, 85
sausage toppings and, 376, 381
thin-crust style, 84
chicken toppings,364–365, 376
Chihuahua cheese, 300
Ciao tomato factory, 215
Clam Chowder Sauce, 277
Classic Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
adapting, for use on New York Pizza Dough, 245
mix-and-match options for, 235
recommended consistency for, 244
Coccia, Enzo, 204
colafritto, 417
cold-proofing, 70-71
preparing dough for, 73
preventing black spots, 72
recommended times for, by pizza style, 75
tempering dough and, 16
emergency method for, 17
colloids (colloidal suspensions), 29
combi ovens
improving performance of, 410-411
method for baking pizza in, 403
commercial planetary mixers, 35, 37-38
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
common problems
baking pizza and, 400–401
cheese and, 310
pizza dough and, 106-107
mixing, 36
preshaping, 64
sauce and, 209
toppings and, 345
vegetables and fruits, 357
Compleat Wheat Pizza Dough variations, 101
method for making, 42
by pizza style, 174-177
concasse, tomato, 226
confit cooking
Garlic Confit Aioli, 264
methods for, 366-367
Consommé, Stock, and Jus Sauce, 269
convection ovens, 395
improving performance of, 410-411
method for baking pizza in, 403
Corn Puree, Grilled, 190
cornicione (rim), 7
vs. under crust, 4-5
width of, S
Country-Style Pizza Dough variations, 101
by pizza style, 180
CPR method for overproofed dough, 77
CQAS (critical quality attributes), 396
cream sauces. See dairy-based sauces
crema fresca, 250
critical quality attributes (CQAs), 396
cross-crusting master dough recipes, 96-99
cross-linked fingers method for preshaping pizza
dough, 60
crowd, cooking for, 109, 421
crumb, 5, 7
alveoli and, 392
bubble formation and, 28, 71
definition of, 4
crust
See also pizza dough, making; pizza dough recipes
coloration and
baking, changes during, 27, 392-393
doneness vs. overdone, 398-399
leoparding (Neapolitan pizzas), 86, 398
preventing black spots, 72
gel layer formation and, 393, 420
names for parts of, 4-7
Cultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 328
cultures, in cheese making, 292
cured meat toppings. See meat toppings
Curried Onion Sauce, 280
D
dairy-based sauces, 250
See also ricotta
Alfredo Sauce, 272
Béchamel, 252
Garlic Chive Béchamel, 254
gellan gum as thickener for, 245
Modernist Béchamel, 253
Mornay sauce, 253
Ranchamel, 253
Bisque Sauce, 275
Cacio e Pepe Sauce, 274
Carbonara Sauce, 272
Charcoal Mascarpone, 255
Clam Chowder Sauce, 277
heavy cream as, 250-251
Modernist Cheese Sauce, 25S
Raclette Slice, 255
Spicy Vodka Sauce, 229
thick store-bought sauces, 251
Ultrastable Beurre Blanc, 261
White Tomato Sauce, 229
DDT (desired dough temperature), 32
DDW (desired dough weight), 21
deck ovens, 402
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough master recipe, 118-120
See also Deep-Dish Pizza Tomato Sauce
attributes of style and, 85
baking methods for, 402, 403, 408, 409
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amounts recommended for, 304
doneness and, 399
dough substitutions for, 97
gel layer formation and, 393, 420
ingredient variations
Chemically-Leavened Deep-Dish Pizza
Dough, 122
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough with Poolish, 121
Modernist Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 121
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
425
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended pan for, 69
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Enriched Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 123
Gluten-Free Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 194
Gluten-Free Deep-Dish Pizza Dough Variation, 194
variations of
Ancient Grain Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Deep-Dish Pizza Dough,
174-175
Country-Style Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 186, 188
Levain-Raised Deep-Dish Pizza Dough,
172-173
No-Knead Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 182-183
Second-Chance Levain Deep-Dish Pizza
Dough, 173
deep-dish pizza pans, 69
Deep-Dish Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
mix-and-match options for, 235
recommended consistency for, 244
in Spicy Tomato Sauce, 228
deep-frying pizza, 417
deep-frying toppings, 368
Denominazione d'Origine Protetta (DOP) seal,
213, 293
desired dough temperature (DDT), 32
desired dough weight (DDW), 21
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough master recipe, 166-168
See also Detroit-style pizza sauce
attributes of style and, 93
baking methods for, 402, 403, 408, 409, 412
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amounts recommended for, 304
cooking for a crowd and, 421
doneness and, 399
dough substitutions for, 99
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
Modernist Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 169
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended pan for, 68
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Argentinean-Style "al Molde" Pizza Dough,
170
Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 198
Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough
Variation, 198
Old Forge Pizza Dough, 171
variations of
Ancient Grain Detroit-Style Pizza Dough,
181
Compleat Wheat Detroit-Style Pizza Dough,
176-177
Country-Style Detroit-Style Pizza Dough,
180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 187, 189
Grain, Nut, or Seed Detroit-Style Pizza
Dough, 178-179
Levain-Raised Detroit-Style Pizza Dough,
172-173
Second-Chance Levain Detroit-Style Pizza
Dough, 173
vegan cheeses for, 311
Detroit-style pizza pans, 68
Detroit-style pizza sauce
dairy-based option for, 251
Detroit-Style Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
recommended consistency for, 244
outside-of-the-box sauce experiments and, 257
purchased soups adapted for use as, 249
recommended amounts, by dough size, 208
diastatic malt powder (DMP), 71, 95
dimpling (stippling) dough, 91
dipping sauces, 382
Direct Pizza Dough variations, 100
See also Detroit-Style Pizza Dough master recipe;
Gluten-Free Pizza Dough variations; Neapolitan Pizza Dough master recipe
Direct Artisan Pizza Dough, 146
Direct Focaccia Dough, 151
Direct High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough,
162
Direct New York Pizza Dough, 136
Direct New York Square Pizza Dough, 156
Direct Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 113
dividing pizza dough, 52-56
See also preshaping pizza dough
basics of, 56
bench knife and scale method, 55
first in, first out (FIFO) approach, 58
plaster knife method, 63
setting up your workstation, 53-54
tips for, 54
without a scale, 56
diving arm or twin-arm mixers, 38
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
DMP (diastatic malt powder), 71, 95
docking, 84
doneness, 8, 398-399
DOP (Denominazione d'Origine Protetta) seal,
213, 293
double hydration mixing method, 41
dough. See pizza dough, making; pizza dough
recipes
Dough CPR method, 77
dough inclusions. See inclusions
dough presses, 420
dough relaxers, 72, 95, 100
Dry (restaurant)
E
Pressure-Caramelized Zucchini Sauce, 279
eatability, 344
egg-based sauces
See also aioli; Mayonnaise
Carbonara Sauce, 272
Egg Yolk Sauce for, 273
Immersion Blender Hollandaise, 260
Sabayon Sauce, 261
Sous Vide Hollandaise, 260
Eggless Aioli (Milk Aioli), 264
eggs, as topping, 204, 352-353
einkorn flour, in Ancient Grain Pizza Dough
variations, 181
electric fryers, 417
emergencies, shortcuts for, 105
emergency dough tempering, 17
Emergency Pizza Dough variations, 101
Emergency Artisan Pizza Dough, 147
Emergency High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 163
Emergency Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 131
Emergency New York Pizza Dough, 137
emmer flour, in Ancient Grain Pizza Dough variations, 181
Emmy Squared, 259
emulsification, stages of, 259
emulsifying salts, 326, 332
emulsion-based sauces, 259
aioli, 259
Aioli (recipe), 264
Garlic Confit Aioli, 264
Gochujang Aioli, 264
Milk Aioli (Eggless Aioli), 264
vegan substitute for, 265
Wasabi Aioli, 264
Barbecue Sauce, 267
dairy-based sauces and, 250
426
hollandaise sauces
Immersion Blender Hollandaise, 260
Sous Vide Hollandaise, 260
Invincible Vinaigrette, 266
Mayonnaise, 262
Arugula Mayonnaise, 263
Modernist Mayonnaise, 262
Sabayon Sauce, 261
timing ofadding to pizza, 259
tools for, 259
Ultrastable Beurre Blanc, 261
vegan substitute for, 265
Enriched Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 123
enzymatic activity, 24, 26-27, 49, 71
equipment. See tools, pizza making
experienced bakers, pizza doughs for, 108
experiments. See pizza experiments
extensibility
F
comparing mixers and, 39
extensograph developed for, 95
farmhouse (farmstead) cheeses, 286
fats and oils
incorporated into cheese
Higher-Fat Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 334
additional fat options, parametric recipе
for, 334
amount of fat added to, by product, 335
Ricotta with Added Fat, 339
incorporated into pizza dough, 95
301% Fat Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
117
fermentation
See also bulk fermentation; final proofing
factors affecting, 16
machine mixing and, 23, 25
managing dough schedule and, 16
Fermented Tomato Sauce, 230
fermentation jar for, 230
FIFO (first in, first out) method, 58
final proofing, 65-77
bubble formation and, 71
calling proof, 70, 76
fingertip test, 76-77
conditions (temperatures) and times for, by
pizza style, 75
Dough CPR (for overproofed dough), 77
managing dough schedule and, 16
methods of, 70
cold-proofing, 70-71
preparing dough for, 73
preventing black spots, 72
recommended times for, by pizza style, 75
tempering dough and, 16, 17
in a proofer, 71, 74
with rolling rack covers, 74
room temperature, 70
preparing dough for, 73
recommended times for, by pizza style, 75
Neapolitan pizza dough and
experiments on right method for, 88
methods used in Naples vs. rest of Italy, 89
processes inside pizza dough during, 27
proofing containers, 66-69
shear hardening and, 70, 77
warm-proofing, 75
finishing toppings, 382
fior di latte mozzarella. See mozzarella
first in, first out (FIFO) method, 58
first proof (first fermentation). See bulk
fermentation
flavor evaluation, triangle test for, 9
Flavor Variations (purees) for pizza doughs, 103
by puree type, 186-190
recipes for purees
Grilled Corn Puree, 190
Pressure-Caramelized Cauliflower Puree, 191
Pressure-Caramelized Shiitake Mushroom
Puree, 191
Sunchoke Puree, 190
Flavored Oil-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 337
flavored oil toppings, 382
olive oil, 383
Flotill Foods Corporation, 221
flour
gluten development and, 29
Gluten-Free Flour Blend, 199
mixing, functions of, 23, 24
permitted by AVPN, 87
stages ofpizza-making process and, 26-27
foam, dough as, 29
Focaccia Dough master recipe, 148-150
attributes of style and, 91
baking methods for, 402, 403, 408, 409
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
doneness and, 399
dough substitutions for, 98
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
Direct Focaccia Dough, 151
Modernist Focaccia Dough, 151
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
preshaping tips and methods for, 59
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended pan for, 68
sauce amount recommended for, 208
stippling (dimpling), 91
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Pan Pizza Dough, 197
variations of
Ancient Grain Focaccia Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Focaccia Dough, 176-177
Country-Style Focaccia Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 187, 189
Grain, Nut, or Seed Focaccia Dough,
178-179
Levain-Raised Focaccia Dough, 172-173
Second-Chance Levain Focaccia Dough, 173
focaccia pizza pans, 68
folding, 50-51
book folds, 50
four-edge folds
method for, 51
recommended doughs for, 49
food processors, 38
van Over method, 25, 40
fork mixers, 38
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
four-edge folds, 49, 51
François, Zoë, 43
Frankencheeses (cheese blends), 332
Blue Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Fresh Goat Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Parmesan Frankencheese, 333
French Onion Sauce, 280
Frico (Cheese Crisps), 372
fried pizza. See frying pizza
fried toppings. See frying toppings
fruit-based sauces. See vegetable- and fruit-based
sauces
fruit inclusions in pizza dough. See inclusions
fruit puree flavor variations for pizza doughs,
188-189
fruit toppings. See vegetable and fruit toppings
frying pizza
deep-frying, 417
in improvised shallow fryer, 418
frying toppings
deep-frying, 368
shallow frying, 362
full gluten development, 30, 49
427
G
Garlic Chive Béchamel, 254
Garlic Confit Aioli, 264
in Arugula Mayonnaise, 263
gas. See bubble formation
gas-fired pizza ovens
benefits of, 407
method for baking pizza in, 405
spinning pizza, techniques for, 406-407
gas fryers, 417
gel, dough as, 29
"gel layer" (gum line), 393, 420
gelatinization of starch, 27, 392
gellan gum, as sauce thickener, 245
Gemignani, Tony, 220, 301
Quick New York Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
Gino's East (Chicago, IL), 376
gluten development, 24, 31
factors of proper development, 29
hydration and, 23, 25
pizza-making steps and, 26-27
Fresh Goat Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Goat's Milk Ricotta, 339
Modernist Goat's Milk Mozzarella, 329
goat's milk, 286
Gochujang Aioli, 264
gourmet pizza. See Pizza Gourmet Dough
Grain, Nut, and Seed Inclusions Pizza Dough
variations, 101
See also Ancient Grain Pizza Dough variations;
Compleat Wheat Pizza Dough variations
bulk fermentation and, 48-49
incorporating into dough by machine, 41
by pizza style, 178-179
tips for, 179
grandma-style pizza pans, 68
Grilled Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 117
Grilled Corn Puree, 190
grilling pizzas, 414-415
gum line ("gel layer"), 393, 420
gum tragacanth, 240
Gumbo Sauce, 276
stages of (low, medium, and full),30 H
hand mixing, 45-46
vs. machine mixing, 23
trade-off of intensity vs. time, 25
windowpane test for, 30
Gluten-Free Flour Blend, 199
Gluten-Free Pizza Dough variations, 103
experiments performed for, 104
Gluten-Free Artisan Pizza Dough, 196
Gluten-Free Artisan Pizza Dough Variation, 196
Gluten-Free Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
193
Gluten-Free Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough
Variation, 193
Gluten-Free Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 194
Gluten-Free Deep-Dish Pizza Dough Variation,
194
Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 198
Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough Variation, 198
Gluten-Free Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 195
Gluten-Free Neapolitan Pizza Dough Variation,
195
Gluten-Free New York Pizza Dough, 196
Gluten-Free New York Pizza Dough Variation,
196
Gluten-Free Pan Pizza Dough, 197
Gluten-Free Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 192
Gluten-Free Thin-Crust Pizza Dough Variation,
192
gluten network, 23, 24
glutenin and gliadin, 24, 26
goat cheeses
method for mixing in a bowl, 46
no-knead method, 47
trade-off of intensity vs. time, 25
in wooden tubs (madia), 47
Herb-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 335
herb puree flavor variations for pizza doughs,
186-187, 190
Hertzberg, Jeff, 43
High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough master
recipe, 158-160
See also Al Taglio Pizza Tomato Sauce
attributes of style and, 92
baking methods for, 402, 403, 408, 409
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cooking for a crowd and, 421
doneness and, 399
dough substitutions for, 99
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
Direct High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 162
Emergency High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 163
High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough with
Poolish, 162
Modernist High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 161
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
preshaping tips and methods for, 59
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended pan for, 68
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Pan Pizza Dough, 197
Pizza Gourmet Dough, 165
Roman Pizza alla Pala Dough, 164
variations of
Ancient Grain High-Hydration Al Taglio
Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat High-Hydration Al Taglio
Pizza Dough, 176-177
Country-Style High-Hydration Al Taglio
Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 187, 189
Grain, Nut, or Seed High-Hydration Al
Taglio Pizza Dough, 178-179
Second-Chance Levain High-Hydration Al
Taglio Pizza Dough, 173
high-hydration pizza doughs
See also Focaccia Dough master recipe; HighHydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough master recipe
autolyse technique for, 23, 32-33
double hydration mixing method for, 41
High-Hydration Artisan Pizza Dough, 146
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
Modernist High-Hydration Neapolitan Pizza
Dough, 127
preshaping tips and methods for, 59
hollandaise sauces
Immersion Blender Hollandaise, 260
Sous Vide Hollandaise, 260
home ovens
improving performance of, 410-411
method for baking pizza in, 409
transfers using parchment paper, 391
homogenization, 250
Hormel pepperoni, 378
Humm, Daniel
Sous Vide Hollandaise, 260
hydration
crumb and, 7, 83
gluten development and, 23, 25
Hyland, Emily and Matt, 259
Immersion Blender Hollandaise, 260
Imo's (St. Louis, MO.), 300, 408
impinger ovens, 388
method for baking pizza in, 408
428
transfer methods for, 391
inclusions
See also Ancient Grain Pizza Dough variations;
Compleat Wheat Pizza Dough variations
bulk fermentation and, 48-49
Flavor Variations (purees) for pizza doughs, 103
by puree type, 186-190
recipes for purees
Grilled Corn Puree, 190
Pressure-Caramelized Cauliflower Puree,
191
Pressure-Caramelized Shiitake Mushroom
Puree, 191
Sunchoke Puree, 190
Grain, Nut, and Seed Pizza Dough variations,
101
by pizza style, 178-179
tips for, 179
incorporating into dough by machine, 41
matching, to flavor profile, 91
ingredients
baker's percentage and, 18-21
gluten development and, 29
order of adding to recipe and, 33
weighing, importance of, 21
Italian Sausage, 381
ال
Jus, Stock, and Consommé Sauce, 269
K
Katz, Burt
Argentinean-Style "al Molde" Pizza Dough, 170
Kellogg, John Harvey, 311
Khorasan flour, in Ancient Grain Pizza Dough
variations, 181
kitchen tools. See tools, pizza making
L
lactic acid bacteria (LAB), 292
lactose, 287
Lahey, Jim, 47
Laksa Sauce, 274
Laplace pressure, 28
legume puree flavor variations for pizza doughs,
186-187
leoparding, 86, 398
Levain-Raised Pizza Dough variations, 101
See also Second-Chance Levain Pizza Dough
variations
calculating baker's percentage with, 19
Focaccia Dough master recipe, 148-150
Compleat Wheat Focaccia Dough, 176-177
Grain, Nut, or Seed Focaccia Dough,
178-179
Modernist Focaccia Dough, 151
High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough master
recipe, 158-160
Compleat Wheat High-Hydration Al Taglio
Pizza Dough, 176-177
Grain, Nut, or Seed High-Hydration Al
Taglio Pizza Dough, 178-179
Modernist High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 161
Roman Pizza alla Pala Dough, 164
by pizza style, 172-173
Lewis, Tillie, 221
loaders (mini loading peels), 389
low gluten development, 30
low-moisture mozzarella. See "pizza cheese"
M
machine mixing, 34-35
common problems, 36
desired dough temperature (DDT), 32
double hydration method, 41
friction and, 23, 25
vs. hand mixing, 23
incorporating inclusions, 41
right amount of dough and, 34
trade-off ofintensity vs. time, 25
types of mixers, 37-38
dough capacity and, 34
influence on final dough outcomes, 39
tips for, 35
van Over method, 25, 40
Madhus, Meyers, 104
Gluten-Free Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 198
Maillard reaction, 27, 393
malt powder. See diastatic malt powder (DMP)
malted barley syrup, 95
MAP (modified atmosphere packaging), 313
margherita pizza
Neapolitan
applying cheese before sauce on, 207
low-moisture cheeses on, 298
popularity of, 354
São Paulo style, 223
marinara pizza sauce
Marinara Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
optimal consistency for, 242
solution for sauce dilemma, 222
Strawberry Marinara Sauce, 228
Mascarpone, Charcoal, 255
master pizza dough recipes, 81-83
See also specific master recipe
Artisan Pizza Dough, 142–144
Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 114-116
choosing dough to make,guide for, 108-109
comparison of steps/timing for each dough, 17
cross-crusting recommendations for, 96-99
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 118-120
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 166-168
Focaccia Dough, 148-150
High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough, 158-160
Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 124-126
New York Pizza Dough, 132-134
New York Square Pizza Dough, 152-154
overview ofstyles and, 84-93
variations of, 100-103
pizza sizes and dough weights for, 94
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 110-112
Mayonnaise, 262
Arugula Mayonnaise, 263
Modernist Mayonnaise, 262
meat sauces
See also stock sauces
Bolognese Sauce, 270
Gumbo Sauce, 276
meat slicers, 375
meat toppings, 375-376
beef, 376
chicken, 376
cooking confit (submerged in oil), 366-367
cooking sous vide, 364-365
cured meats, 375-376
ham, 375, 376
pepperoni
curling (or cupping), 379
Hormel, as standard for, 378
popularity of, 354
preparation of, by type of meat, 377
slicing, tips for, 375
sticking together, 375
topping drag and, 353, 375
fresh (raw) sausage, 376
Italian Sausage, 381
precooking, 375
seafood, 376
medium-crust pizzas, 7
medium gluten development, 30, 48-49
methylcellulose, as sauce thickener, 246
Mexican cheeses, 300
Meyers Glutenfri Bageskole (Meyers), 104
milk. See cheese making; dairy-based sauces
429
Milk Aioli (Eggless Aioli), 264
mixing pizza dough, 23-47
autolyse method and, 23, 32-33
bubble formation and, 28, 71
chemical classification of dough and, 29
Compleat Wheat dough, method for, 42
desired dough temperature (DDT), 32
dispersion and, 25
factors affecting time for, 44
functions and processes of, 24-25, 26
gluten development, 24, 31
factors of proper development, 29
hydration and, 23, 25
stages of (low, medium, and full), 30
trade-off of intensity vs. time, 25
windowpane test for, 30
hand mixing, 45-46
vs. machine mixing, 23
method for mixing in a bowl, 46
no-knead method, 47
trade-off of intensity vs. time, 25
in wooden tubs (madia), 47
machine mixing, 34-35
common problems, 36
desired dough temperature (DDT), 32
double hydration method, 41
friction and, 23, 25
vs. hand mixing, 23
incorporating inclusions, 41
right amount of dough and, 34
trade-off of intensity vs. time, 25
types of mixers, 37-38
dough capacity and, 34
influence on final dough outcomes, 39
tips for, 35
van Over method, 25, 40
no-knead method, 25
order of ingredients and, 33
Your Daily Pizza, method for, 43
Modernist bakers, recipes for, 109
Modernist cheeses
Modernist Buttermilk Mozzarella, 330
Modernist Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 326
Modernist Goat's Milk Mozzarella, 329
Modernist Pizza Dough variations, 100
Modernist Artisan Pizza Dough, 145
Modernist Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
116
Modernist Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 121
Modernist Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 169
Modernist Focaccia Dough, 151
Modernist High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 161
Modernist High-Hydration Neapolitan Pizza
Dough, 127
Modernist New York Pizza Dough, 135
Modernist New York Square Pizza Dough, 155
Modernist Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 112
Modernist sauces
dairy-based
Modernist Béchamel, 253
Modernist Cheese Sauce, 255
Modernist Mayonnaise, 262
tomato-based
Modernist Artisan Pizza Tomato Sauce, 227
Modernist Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce,
226
Modernist New York Pizza Tomato Sauce,
227
modified atmosphere packaging (MAP), 313
montanara pizza, frying methods for, 417, 418
Mornay sauce, 253
mozzarella, 297-299, 315
common forms in Italy vs. the United States, 315
fresh (fior di latte mozzarella and mozzarella di
bufala), 297-298
vs. aged, 323
experiments on, 322
baking at low temperatures, 319
Bulk Stretched Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 326
burrata, 298
Burrata (recipe), 331
origin of, 299
Charcoal Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 327
Cultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 328
curds, 290, 319
using on pizza, 318
draining, 298, 319
basic methods for, 321
emergency method for, 321
ready-to-bake procedure (vacuum-sealed
using meat pads), 321
Flavored Oil-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 337
Herb-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 335
Higher-Fat Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 334
additional fat options, parametric recipe
for, 334
amount of fat added to, by product, 335
history of, 316-317
making, 319
Cultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 328
direct acidification vs. using cultures, 315
Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella,
324-32s
using pH meter for, 292
meltability and browning, 309
Modernist Buttermilk Mozzarella, 330
Modernist Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 326
Modernist Goat's Milk Mozzarella, 329
mozzarella di bufala, protected designation
for, 293
options for preparing, before using on pizza,
318
Paprika-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 336
portioning, importance of, 305
Saffron-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 336
separating whey from fat, method for, 320
shaping into balls, 318, 319, 323
storing, 320
freezing, 312
MAP technique for, 313
tempering, 298
Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella,
324-325
Vacuum-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella,
337
low-moisture mozzarella ("pizza cheese"),
298-299,315
Frankencheeses (cheese blends), 332
Blue Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Fresh Goat Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Parmesan Frankencheese, 333
meltability and browning, 309
on Neapolitan pizzas, 298
portioning, importance of, 305
prolonging shelf life of, 312-313
recommended amounts, by pizza style, 304
shred size, effect of, 302
shredded, anticaking agents in, 302
shredded vs. sliced, 299, 302
origin of name, 315
vegan options for, 311
mozzarella di bufala, 286, 293, 321, 323
See also mozzarella
Mustard and Tomato Sauce, 229
N
Neapolitan pizza dough
See also AVPN (Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana); Neapolitan Pizza Dough master recipe
attributes of style and, 86-89
"digestibility," 87
leoparding, 86, 398
soft crust, 9
430
tip sag, 6, 346, 393
margherita pizzas
applying cheese before sauce on, 207
low-moisture cheeses on, 298
popularity of, 354
pasta filata cheeses and, 298
proofing methods and
experiments on, 88
methods used in Naples vs. rest of Italy, 89
Neapolitan Pizza Dough master recipe, 124-126
See also Neapolitan pizza sauce
baking methods for, 405-408, 412, 413, 415,
417, 418
transferring dough, 390-391
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese and
applying first, before sauce, 207
recommended amount of, 304
using low-moisture cheeses, 298
vegan options, 311
compared to traditional Neapolitan pizzas, 87
doneness and, 398
dough substitutions for, 97
hand mixing, in wooden tubs (madia), 47
influence of mixer type on final dough and, 39
ingredient variations
AVPN Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 130-131
Emergency Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 131
Modernist High-Hydration Neapolitan Pizza
Dough, 127
Neapolitan Pizza Dough with Poolish, 128
100 Rye Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 129
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing and
methods used in Naples vs. rest of Italy, 89
right method for, 88
times and temperatures for, 75
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amount recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 195
Gluten-Free Neapolitan Pizza Dough Variation, 195
variations of
Ancient Grain Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Neapolitan Pizza Dough,
174-175
Country-Style Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 186, 188
Grain, Nut, or Seed Neapolitan Pizza Dough,
178-179
Levain-Raised Neapolitan Pizza Dough,
172-173
No-Knead Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 182-183
Second-Chance Levain Neapolitan Pizza
Dough, 173
Your Daily Pizza Neapolitan Pizza Dough,
184-18S
Neapolitan pizza sauce
heavy cream used as, 251
outside-of-the-box sauce experiments and,
256-257
purchased soups adapted for use as, 249
recommended amount of, 208
tomato sauces
Classic Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
adapting, for use on New York Pizza
Dough, 245
mix-and-match options for, 235
recommended consistency for, 244
experiments with applying, after cheese, 207
Modernist Neapolitan Pizza Tomato Sauce,
226
White Tomato Sauce, 229
Neapolitan wooden tubs (madia),47
New York Pizza Dough master recipe, 132-134
See also New York pizza sauce
attributes of style and, 90
baking methods for, 402-409, 412, 413, 415,
417,418
transferring dough, 390–391
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese and
applying first, before sauce, 207
recommended amounts of, 304
vegan options, 311
doneness and, 398
dough substitutions for, 97
ingredient variations
Direct New York Pizza Dough, 136
Emergency New York Pizza Dough, 137
Modernist New York Pizza Dough, 135
modifying Neapolitan sauce for use on, 245
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing time and temperature for, 75
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Apizza Dough, 138
Apizza Dough Variation, 139
Gluten-Free New York Pizza Dough, 196
Gluten-Free New York Pizza Dough Variation, 196
Quad Cities Pizza Dough, 140
Quad Cities Pizza Dough Variation, 141
variations of
Ancient Grain New York Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat New York Pizza Dough,
174-175
Country-Style New York Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 186, 188
Grain, Nut, or Seed New York Pizza Dough,
178-179
Levain-Raised New York Pizza Dough,
172-173
No-Knead New York Pizza Dough, 182-183
Second-Chance Levain New York Pizza
Dough, 173
Your Daily Pizza New York Pizza Dough,
184-185
New York pizza sauce
heavy cream used as, 251
modifying Neapolitan sauce for use as, 245
New York Pizza Tomato Sauce, 227
Amatriciana Sauce, 227
experiments with applying, after cheese, 207
Modernist New York Pizza Tomato Sauce,
227
Quick New York Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
mix-and-match options for, 235
recommended consistency for, 244
in Spicy Vodka Sauce, 229
in Tomato and Mustard Sauce, 229
outside-of-the-box sauce experiments and,
256-257
purchased soups adapted for use as, 249
recommended amounts, by dough size, 208
White Tomato Sauce (see note), 229
New York Square Pizza Dough master recipe,
152-154
See also New York Square Pizza Tomato Sauce
attributes of style and, 92
baking methods for, 402, 403, 408, 409
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amount recommended for, 304
cooking for a crowd and, 421
doneness and, 399
dough substitutions for, 98
influence of mixer type on final pizza and, 39
ingredient variations
Direct New York Square Pizza Dough, 156
Modernist New York Square Pizza Dough,
155
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
431
recommended pan for, 68
recommended topping weights for, 348
sauce amount recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Pan Pizza Dough, 197
Sfincione Dough (aka Sfinciuni Dough), 157
variations of
Ancient Grain New York Square Pizza
Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat New York Square Pizza
Dough, 176-177
Country-Style New York Square Pizza
Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 187, 189
Grain, Nut, or Seed New York Square Pizza
Dough, 178-179
Levain-Raised New York Square Pizza
Dough, 172-173
Second-Chance Levain New York Square
Pizza Dough, 173
New York Square Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
recommended consistency for, 244
nightshade plants, about, 216
no-knead method, 25
mixing technique for, 47
No-Knead Pizza Dough variations, 102
by pizza style, 182-183
nondairy cheeses. See vegan cheeses
nut inclusions (solid). See Grain, Nut, and Seed
Inclusions Pizza Dough variations
nut paste flavor variations for pizza doughs,
186-187
Ο
Oaxaca string cheese, 300
Ogden Foods, 221
Oil-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, Flavored, 337
oil, mixing into dough, tips for, 34
oil-slick method for preshaping wet doughs, 59
oil toppings, flavored, 382
olive oil, 383
Old Forge Pizza Dough, 171
Olivastri Millenari (Sardinia, Italy), 383
olive oil, 383
100 Rye Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 129
Onion Sauce, Curried, 280
Onion Sauce, French, 280
oregano, dried, 351
outside-of-the-box sauces, 256-257
oven spring, 27, 71, 387
ovens. See baking pizza
overproofed pizza dough, 70, 76
Dough CPR and, 77
P
pan-baked pizzas
See also Deep-Dish Pizza Dough master recipe;
Detroit-Style Pizza Dough master recipe;
Focaccia Dough master recipe; High-Hydration
Al Taglio Pizza Dough master recipe; New
York Square Pizza Dough master recipe
baking methods for (oven types), 402-403, 408,
409,412
baking pans
preparing dough for proofing in, 73
sizes, by pizza style, 94
types of, 66, 68-69
gel layer formation and, 393, 420
overview of styles, 91-93
paneer, 300
Panificio Davide Longoni (Milan, Italy), 402
Panificio Menchetti (Arezzo, Italy), 420
Papa's Tomato Pies
Tomato and Mustard Sauce, 229
Paprika-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 336
parbaking and prebaking pizza dough, 419-420
cooking for a crowd and, 421
parchment paper, transfers using, 391
Parmesan cheese
meltability, lack of, 309
methods of extending shelf life and, 312-313
Parmesan Frankencheese, 333
vs. Parmigiano-Reggiano, 351
shakers of, at pizzerias, 351
part-skim mozzarella. See "pizza cheese"
parts of pizza, names for, 4-7
pasta filata cheeses
cheese-making process and, 291
origin of name, 291
types of, 294, 297-299
pasta sauces, soups, and stocks as pizza sauce,
268-269
adjusting consistency, by type of soup or sauce,
247
experiments on, 249
Alfredo Sauce, 272
Bagna Cauda Sauce, 271
Bisque Sauce, 275
Bolognese Sauce, 270
Cacio e Pepe Sauce, 274
Carbonara Sauce, 272
Clam Chowder Sauce, 277
Egg Yolk Sauce, 273
Gumbo Sauce, 276
Laksa Sauce, 274
outside-of-the-box sauce experiments, 256-257
Puttanesca Sauce, 271
stocks
aromatic ingredients for, 270
parametric recipe for, by type of stock,
268-269
basic method for, 268
Stock, Jus, and Consommé Sauce, 269
pasteurized vs. raw milk, 288-289
payload, 346-347
recommended weights, by pizza style, 348
pectin, 95
peels, 388
methods for transferring dough with, 390–391
saucing/assembling pizza on, 204, 390
spinning pizza with, 406-407
types of, 389
Pepe, Franco, 47, 86, 204, 207
pepperoni
curling (or cupping) and, 379
Hormel, as standard for, 378
popularity of, 354
pesto
method for making, 240
parametric recipe for, by pesto typе, 238-239
stabilizing, methods for, 240
PGA (propylene glycol alginate), 240
pH meters, 292
pH of processed tomato products, 211, 216
pizza bones, 4
"pizza cheese"(low-moisture mozzarella),
298-299, 315
Frankencheeses (cheese blends), 332
Blue Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Fresh Goat Cheese Frankencheese, 333
Parmesan Frankencheese, 333
meltability and browning, 309
on Neapolitan pizzas, 298
portioning, importance of, 305
prolonging shelf life of, 312-313
recommended amounts, by pizza style, 304
shredded, anticaking agents in, 302
shredded vs. sliced, 299, 302
pizza crust, names for parts of, 4-7
pizza deck oven, 402
pizza dough, chemical properties of, 29
pizza dough flavor variations. See Flavor Variations
(purees) for pizza doughs
pizza dough inclusions. See inclusions
pizza dough, making, 3-77
See also specific step
bench resting, 48, 49
bread/bread making, compared to, 3, 350
432
bulk fermentation, 48-51
changes happening inside dough, by stage, 26-27
choosing dough to make, 108-109
common problems, 36, 106-107
dividing and preshaping, 52-64
final proofing, 65-77
mixing, 23-47
naming the parts of pizza, 4-7
planning and, 15-21
preventing black spots, 72
quality characteristics and, 8-9
triangle test for, 9
tools for, 10-13
pizza dough recipes, 81-199
See also master pizza dough recipes; specific master
recipe; specific variation recipe
choosing dough to make, 108-109
overview of styles, 82-83
master recipes, 84-93
variations of, 100-103
pizza experiments
cheese and
applying to pizza, before sauce, 207
baking mozzarella at low temperatures, 319
draining and aging mozzarella, effects of, 322
Frankencheeses, 332
freezing, effects of, 312
meltability and browning observations, 309
modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) for
storage of, 313
mozzarella shred size, effect of, 302
ready-to-bake fresh mozzarella, procedure
for, 321
separating whey from fat in fresh mozzarella,
320
shredded mozzarella, effect ofanticaking agents in, 302
use of low-moisture cheeses on Neapolitan
pizza, 298
vegan cheeses, 311
pepperoni, curling of, 379
pizza dough and
cross-crusting master recipes, 96-99
factors affecting final results, 396
gluten-free pizza recipes, 104
influence of mixer type on final dough, 39
Modernist Bread experiment results, compared to, 95
Neapolitan pizza dough, right proofing
method for, 88
preventing black spots, 72
proofing times and temperatures, 75
sauces and
applying cheese to pizza before, 207
outside-of-the-box sauces, 256-257
purchased soups, adapting for use as, 249
thickening agents
for Neapolitan sauce, 245
sugar-free pancake syrup thickener, 246
for white sauces, 245
Pizza Gourmet Dough, 165
pizza montanara, frying methods for, 417, 418
pizza, names for parts of, 4-7
pizza parties. See crowd, cooking for
pizza peels. See peels
pizza, quality characteristics of, 8-9
triangle test for, 9
Pizza Rock, 301
pizza sauces. See sauces
pizza screens. See screens, pizza
pizza sizes
by dough tyре, 94
topping weights and, 348
pizza slices
holding a plank and tip sag, 6, 346, 393
topping application and, 349
pizza styles
See also master pizza dough recipes
choosing dough to make, 108-109
overview of, 82-83
master recipes, 84-93
variations of, 100-103
pizza toppings. See toppings
Pizzarium (Rome, Italy), 92
Pizzeria Uno (Chicago, IL), 85
Enriched Deep-Dish Pizza Dough, 123
planetary mixers, 35, 37-38
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
plank, holding, 6, 393
planning to make pizza, 15
choosing dough to make, 108-109
factors affecting fermentation, 16
factors to consider, 15
managing dough schedule, 16
comparing steps/timing for master doughs,
17
tempering dough, 16
emergency method for, 17
time-saving tips, 105
understanding baker's percentage, 18-21
plastic sheet pans, 66, 73
polydextrose, 95
ponzu, in Vacuum-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella,
337
poolish, pizza doughs with, 82-83
Artisan Pizza Dough master recipe, 142-144
variations of
Compleat Wheat Artisan Pizza Dough,
174-175
Grain, Nut, or Seed Artisan Pizza Dough,
178-179
High-Hydration Artisan Pizza Dough, 146
Modernist Artisan Pizza Dough, 145
calculating baker's percentage with, 19-20
Deep-Dish Pizza Dough with Poolish, 121
Focaccia Dough master recipe, 148-150
variations of
Compleat Wheat Focaccia Dough,
176-177
Grain, Nut, or Seed Focaccia Dough,
178-179
Modernist Focaccia Dough, 151
High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza Dough with
Poolish, 162
Neapolitan Pizza Dough master recipe
Neapolitan Pizza Dough with Poolish, 128
100 Rye Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 129
New York Pizza Dough master recipe, 132-134
submaster recipes
Apizza Dough, 138
Quad Cities Pizza Dough, 140
variations of
Compleat Wheat New York Pizza Dough,
174-175
Grain, Nut, or Seed New York Pizza
Dough, 178-179
Modernist New York Pizza Dough, 135
New York Square Pizza Dough master recipe,
152-154
variations of
Compleat Wheat New York Square Pizza
Dough, 176-177
Grain, Nut, or Seed New York Square
Pizza Dough, 178-179
Modernist New York Square Pizza Dough,
155
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough master recipe, 110-112
variations of
Compleat Wheat Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 174-175
Grain, Nut, or Seed Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 178-179
Modernist Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 112
portable ovens, 416
Potatoes, Rösti, 371
433
prebaking and parbaking pizza dough, 419-420
cooking for a crowd and, 421
preferments
See also Levain-Raised Pizza Dough variations;
poolish, pizza doughs with; Second-Chance
Levain Pizza Dough variations
calculating baker's percentage with, 19-20
order of ingredients and, 33
pizza doughs not requiring. see Direct Pizza
Dough variations
van Over method used with, 40
pregelatinized flour, in Modernist High-Hydration
Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 127
preshaping pizza dough, 52, 57
See also dividing pizza dough
common problems, 64
high-hydration (wet) doughs, tips for, 59
methods for
båtards, 62
medium or large dough balls, 61-62
small dough balls, 60
using a plaster knife, 63
organizing the process, 58
first in, first out (FIFO) method, 58
setting up your workstation, 53-54
tension and, 57
pressure-caramelizing
fruit and vegetable toppings, method for, 373
pizza dough inclusions
Flavor Variations, by puree and dough type,
188-189
Pressure-Caramelized Cauliflower Puree, 191
Pressure-Caramelized Shiitake Mushroom
sauces
Puree, 191
Pressure-Caramelized Vegetable Sauce, 278
Pressure-Caramelized Zucchini Sauce, 279
proofers (proofer cabinets or proofing boxes), 71,
74
proofing. See bulk fermentation; final proofing
proofing containers, 66-69
propylene glycol alginate (PGA), 240
proteases, 24, 49
protein coagulation, 392
Provel cheese, origin of, 300
provolone, 294, 304, 312, 313
Puck, Wolfgang, 259
purees. See Flavor Variations (purees) for pizza
doughs; vegetable- and fruit-based sauces
Puttanesca Sauce, 271
Q
Quad Cities Pizza Dough, 140
Quad Cities Pizza Dough Variation, 141
Quick New York Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
mix-and-match options for, 235
R
Raclette Slice, 255
Ranchamel, 253
raw tomato sauces. See tomato sauces, raw
raw vs. pasteurized milk, 288-289
recipe conversion factor (RCF), 21
recipes, guide for choosing, 108-109
recipes, scaling. See baker's percentage
red pepper, crushed, shakers of, 351
rennet, 293
ricotta, 338
Buttermilk Ricotta, 339
cheese-making process and, 291
Goat's Milk Ricotta, 339
prolonging shelf life, experiments with, 312-313
Ricotta (recipe), 338
Ricotta with Added Fat, 339
vegan, recommendations for, 311
rim (cornicione), 7
vs. under crust, 4-5
width of, 5
ring method for preshaping pizza dough, 60
rolling rack covers, 74
Roman al taglio pizza pans, 68
Roman Pizza alla Pala Dough, 164
room-temperature proofing, 70
Neapolitan pizza dough and
experiments on, 88
in Naples vs. rest of Italy, 89
preparing dough for, 73
recommended times for, by pizza style, 75
Rösti Potatoes, 371
Rotavap Tomato Sauce, 236
Water Bath Variation, 236
roux, replacement for, 245
rye pizza doughs
Ancient Grain Detroit-Style Pizza Dough, 181
Ancient Grain Focaccia Dough, 181
Ancient Grain High-Hydration Al Taglio Pizza
Dough, 181
Ancient Grain New York Square Pizza Dough,
181
Country-Style Pizza Dough variations, 101
by pizza style, 180
S
100% Rye Neapolitan Pizza Dough, 129
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough master recipe (see
note), 110
Sabayon Sauce, 261
Saffron-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 336
Salsa Verde, 281
salt
adding, to tomato sauce, 216
gluten development and, 29
as quality characteristic of pizza, 8
San Marzano tomatoes, 215, 235
about, 213
San Telmo market (Buenos Aires, Argentina), 376
sauces, 203-281
See also dairy-based sauces; emulsion-based
sauces; pasta sauces, soups, and stocks as pizza
sauce; pesto; tomato sauces
applying, 205-207
after baking, 206
before baking, 206
with dough on worktable vs. on peel or
screen, 204
light, medium, and heavy saucing, 207
recommended amounts, by pizza style, 208
in reverse order (adding cheese first), 207
tempering before, 204
tools for, 206-207
common problems, 209
finishing sauces, 382
functions and properties of, 204
gel layer formation and, 393, 420
outside-of-the-box sauces, 256-257
store-bought, as flavor variations in pizza dough,
186-187
thickening, 242
béchamel and roux-based soups, 245
consistency, importance of, 242
heavy cream, options for, 251
method for dispersing a thickener, 246
methods for testing consistency, 243-244
modifying Neapolitan sauce for use on New
York Pizza Dough, 245
modifying pasta sauces and soups, 247
experiments on, 249
recommended consistency, by tomato sauce
type, 244
sugar-free pancake syrup thickener for, 246
tomato skins for, 242
xanthan gum for, 243
vegetable- and fruit-based sauces, 278
434
Curried Onion Sauce, 280
French Onion Sauce, 280
Pressure-Caramelized Vegetable Sauce, 278
Pressure-Caramelized Zucchini Sauce, 279
Salsa Verde, 281
sausage toppings
cured, 375-376
pepperoni
curling (or cupping), 379
Hormel, as standard for, 378
popularity of, 354
preparation of, by type of meat, 377
fresh, 376
Italian Sausage, 381
precooking, 375
scaling recipes
using baker's percentage, 18-21
without using baker's percentage, 21
scamorza, 294, 298, 315
schedules. See planning to make pizza
screens, pizza, 388
assembling pizza on, vs. on worktable, 204
transferring methods using, 391
seafood
sauces
Clam Chowder Sauce, 277
Gumbo Sauce, 276
Shellfish Stock Sauce, 268
toppings, 376
Bagna Cauda Sauce with, 271
cooking sous vide, 364-365
searing toppings, 363
Second-Chance Levain Pizza Dough variations,
101
by pizza style, 173
seed inclusions (solid). See Grain, Nut, and Seed
Inclusions Pizza Dough variations
seed paste flavor variations for pizza doughs,
186-187
Sfincione Dough (aka Sfinciuni Dough), 157
shakers of crushed red pepper, Parmesan, and dried
oregano, 351
shallow frying technique
for pizza, 418
for toppings, 362
shaping pizza dough, 57
See also preshaping pizza dough
shear hardening, 70, 77
sheet pans, 66, 68-69
shellfish. See seafood
Shiitake Mushroom Puree, Pressure-Caramelized,
191
shredded cheese
mozzarella, anticaking agents in, 302
shred size, effect of, 302
vs. sliced, 296, 299, 302
Sicilian pizza. See New York Pizza Dough master
recipe
Sicilian pizza pans, 68
Sigillito, John, 300
Silvestrini, Mario, 312
Slow-Roasted Tomato Sauce, 231
smoke point, 368, 417
solution, dough as, 29
soups as pizza sauce. See pasta sauces, soups, and
stocks as pizza sauce
sourdough. See Levain-Raised Pizza Dough
variations
Sous Vide Hollandaise, 260
sous vide method for fruits and vegetables,
364-365
Spago, 259
spelt flour, in Ancient Grain Pizza Dough variations, 181
Spicy Tomato Sauce, 228
Spicy Vodka Sauce, 229
spinning pizzas, techniques for, 406-407
spiral mixers, 35, 37
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
spoodles (sauce spoons), 205, 206
square method for preshaping pizza dough, 61
St. Louis-style pizza
Provel cheese and, 300
stackable tubs, 66, 73
stand mixers, 35, 38
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
starch gelatinization, 27, 392
starch "glass," 387
starch granules, breakdown of, 24, 26-27
stippling (dimpling) dough, 91
stock sauces
aromatic ingredients for, 270
parametric recipe for, by type of stock, 268-269
basic method for, 268
Stock, Jus, and Consommé Sauce, 269
stove top, cooking pizza on, 412
Strawberry Marinara Sauce, 228
string cheeses, 291, 299, 300
Stuffed-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
recommended consistency for, 244
sugar-free pancake syrup thickener for pizza sauces,
246
Sunchoke Puree, 190
T
taste test. See triangle test
temperature
extreme, for baking pizza, 397
fermentation and, 16
final proofing methods, 70-71, 75
mixing dough and, 44
desired dough temperature (DDT), 32
hand mixing and, 45-46
sauces and, 204
toppings and, 351
tempering
dough, after cold-proofing, 16
emergency method for, 17
fresh mozzarella, 298
sauces, 204
10 Diego Vitagliano Pizzeria (Naples, Italy), 241
Thermonix, about, 333
thickening sauces for pizza, 242
béchamel and roux-based soups, 245
consistency, importance of, 242
heavy cream, options for, 251
method for dispersing a thickener, 246
methods for testing consistency, 243
Bostwick Consistometer, 244
modifying Neapolitan sauce for use on New York
Pizza Dough, 245
modifying pasta sauces and soups, 247
experiments on, 249
recommended consistency, by tomato sauce
type, 244
sugar-free pancake syrup thickener for, 246
tomato skins for, 242
xanthan gum for, 243
Thin-Crust Pizza Dough master recipe, 110-112
See also Thin-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce
attributes ofstyle and, 84
baking methods for, 402-409, 412, 413, 415
transferring dough, 390–391
breakdown of timing for each step in, 17
cheese amounts recommended for, 304
doneness and, 398
dough substitutions for, 96
ingredient variations
Direct Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 113
Modernist Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 112
pizza size and dough weight for, 94
proofing times and temperatures for, 75
recommended topping weights for, 348
435
sauce amounts recommended for, 208
submaster recipes
Gluten-Free Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 192
Gluten-Free Thin-Crust Pizza Dough Variation, 192
variations of
Ancient Grain Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 181
Compleat Wheat Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
174-175
Country-Style Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 180
Flavor Variations, by puree type, 186, 188
Grain, Nut, or Seed Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
178-179
Levain-Raised Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
172-173
No-Knead Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
182-183
Second-Chance Levain Thin-Crust Pizza
Dough, 173
Your Daily Pizza Thin-Crust Pizza Dough,
184-185
Thin-Crust Pizza Tomato Sauce, 225
recommended consistency for, 244
thin-crust pizzas, 7
30 Fat Brazilian Thin-Crust Pizza Dough, 117
tip sag, 6, 346, 393
toaster ovens, 412
Tomato and Mustard Sauce, 229
tomato concasse, 226
tomato leaves, as flavoring, 227
tomato sauces, 210–211
See also thickening sauces for pizza
canned tomatoes and, 215
basic parametric recipe for, by pizza sauce
type, 224-225
Brix degrees and, 211, 219
canning process and, 217
choosing, considerations for, 211, 220
common can sizes and weights, 222
consistency standards and, 242
vs. fresh, 210
improving sauce flavor, ingredients for, 232
Lewis, Tillie (Queen of Italian tomatoes)
and, 221
marinara sauce dilemma, solution for, 222
mix-and-match sauce options, 235
recipes for, 224-229
recommended consistency, by pizza sauce
type, 244
San Marzano tomatoes, about, 213
types of products
canned whole tomatoes, 216, 218
crushed or ground tomatoes, 218
diced tomatoes, 218
tomato paste, 219
tomato puree, 218-219
tomato sauce, 219
raw (fresh) tomatoes and
basic tips for, 237
vs. canned, 210
concasse method, 226
Fermented Tomato Sauce, 230
improving sauce flavor, ingredients for, 232
mix-and-match options, 235
Raw Cherry Tomato Sauce, 237
Raw Tomato Sauce, 237
mix-and-match options for, 235
Rotavap Tomato Sauce, 236
Water Bath Variation, 236
Slow-Roasted Tomato Sauce, 231
tomato skins, as sauce thickeners, 242
tomato slices, as topping, 223
tomatoes, about
anatomy of, 212
history of, 210-211
nightshade plants, about, 216
San Marzano tomatoes, 213
varieties of, 212
heirloom, 235
mix-and-match sauce options, 235
Tony's Pizza Napoletana (San Francisco, CA.), 300
tools, pizza making, 10-13
topping drag, 353, 375
toppings, 343-383
See also meat toppings; vegetable and fruit
toppings
applying, 349
even distribution, 349
center loading, 351
matching textures with bite, 353
recommended weights, by pizza style, 348
temperature and, 351
timing of (when to apply), 344, 350
after baking, 352-353
before baking, 351
halfway through baking, 352
biteability and, 344, 353
common problems, 345
common types around the world, 355
database findings on, 354
dipping sauces, 382
eatability and, 344
eggs, 204, 352-353
for finishing pizza, 382
flavored oils, 382
olive oil, 383
Frico (Cheese Crisps), 372
moisture content and, 344, 356
payload, 346-347
recommended weights, by pizza style, 348
science of, 344
shakers of crushed red pepper, Parmesan, and
dried oregano, 351
truffles, 356
transferring floor-baked doughs, 388
methods of, 390-391
tools for, 388-389
transglutaminase, 199
Trenton tomato pies
adding cheese before sauce to, 207
New York Pizza Tomato Sauce for, 227
triangle test, 9
troubleshooting. See common problems
truffles, 356
tubs, stackable, 66, 73
tuck-in method for preshaping pizza dough, 61
twin-arm or diving arm mixers, 38
U
comparing, to other mixers, 39
dough capacity and, 34
Uncultured Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 324-325
under crust, 4-5
underproofed pizza dough, 70, 76
V
vacuum-draining fresh mozzarella, method for, 321
Vacuum-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella, 337
vacuum-sealing method (MAP) for storing cheese,
313
van Over, Charles, 40
van Over method, 25
mixing with, method for, 40
vegan cheeses, 311
vegan emulsion sauce, option for, 265
vegan variation for Gluten-Free Flour Blend, 199
vegetable- and fruit-based sauces, 278
Curried Onion Sauce, 280
French Onion Sauce, 280
Pressure-Caramelized Vegetable Sauce, 278
Pressure-Caramelized Zucchini Sauce, 279
Salsa Verde, 281
vegetable and fruit toppings, 356
common problems, 357
common types/preparation methods, 358-359
precooking techniques
436
charring, 363
cooking confit (submerged in oil), 366-367
cooking sous vide, 364–365
frying
deep-frying, 368
shallow frying, 362
poaching, 364
pressure-caramelizing, 373
roasting, 360-361
sautéing, 362
steaming, 363
raw tomato slices, 223
Rösti Potatoes, 371
starches as, 356
vegetable puree flavor variations for pizza doughs,
186-190
Grilled Corn Puree, 190
Pressure-Caramelized Cauliflower Puree, 191
Sunchoke Puree, 190
Vinaigrette, Invincible, 266
Vodka Sauce, Spicy, 229
W
warm-proofing, 75
Wasabi Aioli, 264
wet pizza doughs. See high-hydration pizza doughs
white sauces. See dairy-based sauces; emulsionbased sauces
White Stock Sauce, 268
White Tomato Sauce, 229
whole wheat doughs. See Compleat Wheat Pizza
Dough variations; Country-Style Pizza Dough
variations
windowpane test, 30
wine, in Vacuum-Infused Fior di Latte Mozzarella,
337
wonton-shape method for preshaping pizza dough,
62
wood-fired pizza ovens
extreme temperatures of, 397
vs. gas-fired pizza ovens, 407
method for baking in, 405
preparing the oven, 404
techniques for spinning pizza in, 406-407
wooden tubs (madia), hand mixing in, 47
xanthan gum
Y
for stabilizing pesto, 240
for thickening sauces, 243
yeast
experiments on, 245, 246
See also preferments
bubble formation and, 28
preventing black spots in pizza dough and, 72
stages of pizza-making process and, 26-27
Your Daily Pizza Dough variations, 102-103
method for making, 43
by pizza style, 184-185
Z
Zucchini Sauce, Pressure-Caramelized, 279
437